 = New York State Route 93 =

 New York State Route 93 ( NY 93 ) is a 43 @.@ 08 @-@ mile ( 69 @.@ 33 km ) state highway in western New York in the United States . The route begins at an intersection with NY 18F in the village of Youngstown and runs in a general northwest – southeast direction across Niagara and Erie counties to its east end at an intersection with NY 5 in the town of Newstead , just south of the village of Akron . NY 93 serves as a connector between several major arterials , including NY 104 in Cambria , NY 31 just west of the city of Lockport , and NY 78 south of the city .
 The route was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . Although it began in Youngstown and ended in Newstead as it does today , the initial routing of NY 93 deviated from the modern path in the vicinity of the city of Lockport . From Cambria to Lockport 's eastern suburbs , the highway originally used NY 425 , Lower Mountain Road , Akron Road , and a series of streets in Lockport . NY 93 was moved onto NY 104 and Junction Road in Cambria in the 1940s , and altered to bypass Lockport to the south on a new highway and Robinson and Dysinger roads in 1991 . In 2006 , NY 93 was realigned west of Lockport to continue south on Junction Road to NY 31 . The change removed NY 93 from Upper Mountain Road , a county @-@ owned highway that had been part of the route since the 1930s .

 = = Route description = =


 = = = West of Lockport = = =

 NY 93 begins at an intersection with NY 18F ( Main Street ; co @-@ designated but not signed as County Route 907 or CR 907 ) in the center of the village of Youngstown . The route proceeds eastward through the village as a two @-@ lane road named Lockport Street , serving two blocks of commercial areas before bending to the northeast and passing into the residential eastern portion of Youngstown . At the eastern village limits , NY 93 briefly widens to four lanes as it enters a partial cloverleaf interchange with the Niagara Scenic Parkway . Past the junction , the highway reverts to a two @-@ lane road and changes names to Youngstown – Lockport Road as it runs across the town of Porter . The residential surroundings continue to the hamlet of Towers Corners , where NY 93 connects to NY 18 ( Creek Road ) .
 After NY 18 , NY 93 curves to the southeast , serving another residential stretch ahead of a junction with Youngstown – Wilson Road ( CR 36 ) on the eastern edge of Towers Corners . After this intersection , the homes give way to farms as the road heads into rural areas of the town . The route continues on a southeast track through Porter , passing a mixture of rural and residential areas on its way into the hamlet of Porter Center , where NY 93 enters an intersection with Porter Center Road ( CR 57 ) . Another southeastward stretch brings the route across Twelvemile Creek and into the hamlet of Ransomville , where NY 93 becomes the community 's main street . Through Ransomville , NY 93 retains the Youngstown – Lockport Road name , intersecting with Ransomville Road ( CR 17 ) in the hamlet 's business district .
 Just outside Ransomville , NY 93 leaves the town of Porter for the town of Wilson . It continues generally southeastward across mostly open terrain , meeting Randall Road ( CR 83 ) and Church Street ( CR 56 ) on its way to the town of Cambria . NY 93 becomes North Ridge Road at the town line , and it soon enters the hamlet of North Ridge , a community built up around the route 's intersection with NY 425 ( Cambria – Wilson Road ) . The hamlet 's residential surroundings continue to the adjacent community of Molyneaux Corners , where NY 93 becomes concurrent with NY 104 ( Ridge Road ) . NY 93 and NY 104 proceed northeast across lightly populated areas for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the hamlet of Warren Corners , at which point NY 93 splits from NY 104 and heads southward along Town Line Road . It immediately intersects with Stone Road ( CR 19 ) before leaving the hamlet .

 = = = Lockport area = = =

 Outside of Warren Corners , the route heads across rural areas along the Cambria – Lockport town line . It soon enters the small hamlet of Hickory Corners , where the road passes under Lower Mountain Road ( CR 902 ) . Access to the highway is made by way of Town Line Road Spur ( CR 114 ) , a connector leading to Lower Mountain Road . NY 93 continues southward along the town line , changing names to Junction Road at an intersection with Upper Mountain Road ( CR 5 ) west of the city of Lockport . From here , the route crosses over CSX Transportation 's Lockport Subdivision rail line at the hamlet of Lockport Junction before intersecting with NY 31 ( Saunders Settlement Road ) and NY 270 ( Campbell Boulevard ) just south of the community . NY 270 begins straight ahead to the south while NY 93 turns northeast onto Saunders Settlement Road , beginning a concurrency with NY 31 .
 Now fully in the town of Lockport , NY 31 and NY 93 proceed northeast through an open area of the town as a four @-@ lane divided highway . The two routes continue to the western edge of the city of Lockport , where they intersect with Upper Mountain Road and the Lockport Bypass . The overlap ends here as NY 93 turns southeastward onto the two @-@ lane bypass . Along the bypass , NY 93 briefly enters the city limits as it runs past several industrial facilities and intersects with Hinman Road ( CR 903 ) just ahead of a bridge over the Erie Canal . Past the waterway , the bypass takes a more southerly course through an undeveloped part of the town of Lockport to a junction with Robinson Road ( CR 123 ) on the Lockport – Pendleton town line . The Lockport Bypass ends here , leaving NY 93 to turn eastward onto Robinson Road .
 The route initially serves a line of homes as it heads along Robinson Road ; however , it soon enters a commercial district surrounding the road 's intersection with NY 78 ( Transit Road ) . At this point , the Lockport – Pendleton town line turns south to follow NY 78 , leaving NY 93 fully within the town of Lockport as it runs eastward past another stretch of homes . Not far from NY 78 , NY 93 changes names to Dysinger Road at an intersection with Beattie Avenue ( CR 14 ) and Raymond Road ( CR 85 ) . The junction also marks a shift in the road 's surroundings as the homes give way to open , rolling terrain . NY 93 continues eastward for several miles to the town of Royalton , where it meets Riddle Road ( CR 35 ) and Akron Road ( CR 142 ) at adjacent intersections just east of the town line .

 = = = East of Lockport = = =

 NY 93 takes over Akron Road 's name and right @-@ of @-@ way , continuing eastward past a line of scattered homes to reach the sparsely developed hamlet of Dysinger . Here , the route turns southward at a junction with Bunker Hill Road ( CR 136 ) . Outside of Dysinger , NY 93 heads southeastward across undeveloped areas of Royalton , connecting to Block Church Road ( CR 110 ) as it approaches Tonawanda Creek and the Niagara – Erie county line . The road runs along the northern edge of the creek for about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) prior to curving southward at an intersection with Wolcottsville Road ( CR 122 ) . The turn brings NY 93 across Tonawanda Creek and into the Erie County town of Newstead , where it becomes known as Maple Road and immediately intersects with CR 260 ( Koepsel Road ) .
 Continuing southward , NY 93 runs across open , rolling terrain , meeting CR 259 ( Tonawanda Creek Road ) on its way to the hamlet of Swifts Mills . Here , the rural surroundings briefly give way to residential areas as NY 93 intersects with CR 255 ( Swift Mills Road ) in the center of the community . South of Swifts Mills , the road serves only intermittent stretches of homes for 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , including a cluster of residences around its closely spaced intersections with CR 253 ( Carney Road ) and CR 42 ( Rapids Road ) . It continues on a southward track past the eastern terminus of CR 218 ( Hunts Corner – Akron Road ) to the outskirts of the village of Akron , where the highway turns east onto Lewis Road and soon enters the village limits . NY 93 runs past a line of homes before intersecting Cedar Street , a road maintained by Erie County as CR 261 north of the village .
 The route turns south at Cedar Street , following the residential street into downtown Akron . Here , NY 93 intersects with CR 573 ( John Street ) at a junction that was once the western terminus of NY 267 . At this intersection , NY 93 heads west on John Street for one block before continuing south on Buffalo Street for another block to Main Street . NY 93 turns westward again , following Main Street through the westernmost part of Akron 's central business district prior to curving southwestward at a junction with Mechanic Street . The highway takes on the Mechanic Street name as it crosses over Murder Creek and leaves downtown Akron . Just south of the creek , NY 93 changes names to Buell Street at an intersection with Jackson Street .
 As the route continues southward through the southern part of Akron , it serves mostly residential areas , save for an industrial complex at NY 93 's intersection with CR 163 ( Clarence Center Road ) and CR 167 ( Parkview Drive ) . NY 93 exits Akron a short distance south of the junction , at which point the route heads into another area of open fields while retaining the Buell Street name . It continues on a southward track for about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to a commercialized intersection with NY 5 ( Main Road ) , where Buell Street and NY 93 both come to an end .

 = = History = =


 = = = Designation and early changes = = =

 NY 93 was established as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , connecting the cities and villages of Youngstown , Lockport , and Akron . While the termini of NY 93 have remained the same to this day , several portions of the route have been realigned since that time . When NY 93 was first assigned , it turned south at the hamlet of North Ridge and overlapped with NY 425 along Cambria – Wilson Road to Lower Mountain Road , then part of NY 3 . NY 425 went west from this junction while NY 93 headed eastward , following NY 3 along Lower Mountain , Gothic Hill , Upper Mountain , and Saunders Settlement roads to the city of Lockport . At Locust Street , NY 93 left NY 3 and exited the city along Locust , High , and Akron streets and Akron Road . It met its current alignment southeast of the city in Royalton .
 NY 3 was realigned c . 1932 to follow Saunders Settlement Road between Shawnee Road ( NY 425 ) and Upper Mountain Road . The former routing of NY 3 along Shawnee , Lower Mountain , Gothic Hill , and Upper Mountain roads was redesignated as NY 3A even though all of NY 3 's former routing was already part of either NY 425 or NY 93 . The NY 3A designation was eliminated c . 1935 when NY 3 was truncated eastward to a new western terminus in central New York . In the early 1940s , NY 93 was altered to follow North Ridge Road , U.S. Route 104 ( now NY 104 ) , and Junction Road between North Ridge and Lower Mountain Road .
 Around the same time that NY 93 was rerouted , NY 270 was also extended northward along Junction Road from NY 31 to US 104 . As a result , NY 93 overlapped NY 270 between Lower Mountain Road and US 104 . The overlap with NY 270 remained in place until c . 1963 when NY 270 was truncated southward to the intersection of Lower Mountain and Junction roads . NY 93 was realigned in the late 1970s to bypass Lower Mountain and Gothic Hill Roads on Junction and Upper Mountain roads , replacing NY 270 along Junction Road . The Lower Mountain Road portion of NY 93 's former routing is now maintained by Niagara County as County Route 902 ( CR 902 ) .

 = = = Lockport realignments = = =

 The Lockport Bypass , a highway bypassing downtown Lockport to the southwest , was opened to traffic on July 26 , 1991 . The highway cost $ 7 @.@ 7 million ( equivalent to $ 13 @.@ 4 million in 2016 ) to construct and extended from the junction of NY 31 and NY 93 west of the city to Robinson Road south of downtown . NY 93 was realigned to follow the new bypass south to Robinson Road , where it turned east and followed Robinson Road ( CR 123 ) and Dysinger Road ( CR 133 ) to Akron Road in Royalton . The portion of Akron Road ( NY 93 's former routing ) east of the Lockport city limits became NY 954M , an unsigned reference route .
 Ownership and maintenance of Robinson Road from the bypass to NY 78 was transferred from Niagara County to the state of New York on September 1 , 1990 , as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The portion of NY 93 between NY 78 and Akron Road became state @-@ maintained on October 1 , 1998 , as part of another swap that also transferred ownership and maintenance of Akron Road to Niagara County . Akron Road is now CR 142 .
 On November 1 , 2005 , the Niagara County Legislature voted on a measure to allow the county to ask the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to remove the NY 93 designation from Upper Mountain Road , a county @-@ maintained highway , and reassign it to Junction Road ( NY 270 ) and Saunders Settlement Road ( NY 31 ) . The impetus for the change came from a resident of Upper Mountain Road , who demanded that trucks should be removed from the roadway . This part of the agenda was passed . NYSDOT obliged to the request in 2006 , rerouting NY 93 as proposed and truncating NY 270 southward to NY 31 .

 = = Major intersections = =



 = Operation USA =

 Operation USA ( OpUSA , Operation California , or OpCal ) is a non profit humanitarian organization dedicated to helping communities alleviate the effects of disaster , disease , and endemic poverty throughout the world by providing privately funded relief , reconstruction , humanitarian aid and development aid . It is exclusively privately funded , receiving no assistance from the United States Federal Government . OPUSA had a revenue of over $ 22 million in fiscal year 2012 and has shipped over $ 425 million worth of " high @-@ priority medical , nutritional and shelter supplies " since its inception , including shipments to Haiti , Japan , Chile , Kenya and Pakistan in 2011 and 2011 .

 = = Awards and affiliations = =

 Operation USA was part of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines in 1997 when it won the Nobel Peace Prize . Operation California was also the winner of the 1983 President 's Volunteer Action Award . Operation USA has been named one of America 's Best 100 Charities by Worth Magazine and , in October 2008 , was named the top @-@ rated " exclusively privately funded charity in the U.S. " by Charity Navigator . Operation USA collaborated with NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the US National Laboratories at Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos to develop new approaches to land mine detection , is a member of InterAction , and is an AlertNet news partner . In 2014 Operation USA 's CEO Richard M. Walden received the Honeywell Hometown Hero Award from the Honeywell Corp.

 = = History = =

 Operation California began in 1979 as " a relief organization created to provide aid to Vietnamese Boat People and Cambodian refugees " , founded by Richard Walden ( still active as President & CEO ) and Llewellyn Werner ( who left in early 1980 ) . The organization flew " the first international relief airlift to Cambodia since 1975 " , delivering medicine to Phnom @-@ Penh . Operation California had airlifted more than $ 3 million worth of aid by October 1979 .
 Since then , Operation USA has become a highly acclaimed aid organization that is involved in helping people in different ways around the world . In 1982 , Operation California sent " the first private airlift from the U.S. to Poland " , delivering 200 @,@ 000 lbs. of medical supplies and medicine ; that year Operation California also airlifted medical supplies to Lebanon . In 1983 , Operation California delivered aid to the children of Vietnam and Cambodia . Operation California provided aid to the earthquake victims in Mexico City in 1985 , as well as working in cooperation with the Unitarian Universalist Service Committee and Oxfam America , to deliver $ 250 @,@ 000 worth of medical aid to Nicaragua . In 1986 Operation California , in conjunction with Medical Aid to El Salvador , sent " [ t ] wo cargo planes carrying $ 500 @,@ 000 worth of relief supplies to earthquake @-@ stricken El Salvador " .
 In 1988 , Operation California began using the name Operation USA because it better described the effort and intent of the organization to represent the entire American people . In 1989 Operation USA facilitated operations on children in Vietnam who had cleft palates by a Los Angeles @-@ based plastic surgeon , Dr Stanley Frileck . Medical aid effort was delivered to Mexico in 1990 , by OPUSA in conjunction with USSR relief workers . In 1991 OPUSA delivered aid to Bangladesh . OpUSA delivered aid to war torn Somali 's in 1993 . In 1994 OpUSA provided earthquake relief . In 1995 the organization provided aid to Hurricane Mitch survivors in Honduras and Nicaragua . In 1999 OpUSA supplied aid to storm victims in Mexico . In 2003 OpUSA delivered aid to Iraq War victims in the Persian Gulf . The tsunami victims in Sri Lanka and Indonesia were aided by OpUSA in 2004 , as well as the Mexico City Flood victims .
 In 2008 , OpUSA has delivered aid to Myanmar cyclone victims as well as Chinese earthquake victims and flood victims in the Midwest , USA .
 In 2015 , OpUsa partners with UniversalGiving to raise fund for its project , which is to deliver recovery aid to Nepal Earthquake victims .

 = = Celebrity affiliates = =

 Operation USA , since the early 1980s , has relied on fundraising efforts featuring singers and celebrities . These include concerts , dinners , and other events . These promotions have featured :
 Barbra Streisand
 Bonnie Raitt
 Carol Burnett
 Crosby , Stills & Nash
 Don Henley
 Ed Asner
 Frank Sinatra
 Jack Elliot
 Jackson Browne
 James Garner
 John Denver
 Julie Andrews
 Kirk Douglas
 Michael Jackson
 New American Orchestra
 Plácido Domingo
 Ricardo Montalban
 Ry Cooder
 Sharon Stone
 The Buena Vista Social Club
 Tony Adams
 Rosario Dawson travelled with Operation USA to Nicaragua in 2008 . George Hamilton assisted with relief to The Philippines Typhoon Haiyan in 2013 as did Barbra Streisand , Rosario Dawson , Jackson Browne , Bill Maher and Judd Apatow .

 = = Film and theater projects = =

 Operation USA also relies on film and theater promotions to generate funds that pay for aid , including :
 Because We Care ( CBS Television Special )
 Beyond Borders ( Hollywood )
 Buena Vista Social Club ( film ) ( Hollywood & Havana )
 Fidel ( film ) ( Hollywood for Showtime )
 Mary Poppins ( musical ) ( London stage )
 Miss Saigon ( Hollywood )
 Roll Bounce
 The Killing Fields ( film ) ( Hollywood & Cambodia )
 Victor / Victoria ( Broadway )
 Eloise at The Plaza ( Disney TV )


 = Typhoon Krosa ( 2013 ) =

 Typhoon Krosa , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Vinta , was a typhoon that made landfall in the northern Philippines in late October 2013 . Forming on October 27 near Guam , the storm slowly intensified while moving westward . Krosa developed an eye and became a typhoon before striking Luzon on October 31 . The storm weakened over land , but re @-@ intensified over the South China Sea , reaching peak winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) on November 2 off the southeast coast of China . Typhoon Krosa stalled and encountered unfavorable conditions , resulting in quick weakening . By November 3 , it had weakened to tropical storm status , and was no longer being warned on by the next day . In northern Luzon , Krosa damaged 32 @,@ 000 houses , including 3 @,@ 000 that were destroyed , and caused four fatalities . High winds and rainfall left P277 million ( PHP , $ 6 @.@ 4 million USD ) in damage .

 = = Meteorological history = =

 On October 27 , an area of convection with a broad circulation persisted southeast of Guam , and slowly consolidated due to moderate wind shear and westerly outflow . That day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression about 380 km ( 235 mi ) to the southeast of Hagåtña , Guam . At 2100 UTC on October 28 , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) began issuing advisories on the depression , giving it the local name Vinta . The next day , the JMA upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Krosa ( 1329 ) , and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also classified it as Tropical Depression 29W . By that time , the storm was moving steadily westward due to the subtropical ridge to the north . With the warm waters of the Philippine Sea , lessening wind shear , and improving outflow , Krosa gradually strengthened , and the JTWC also upgraded Krosa to tropical storm status on October 30 after an eye feature developed .
 While approaching northern Luzon on October 29 , Krosa quickly intensified as the initial eye feature organized into a well @-@ defined eye . Late on October 30 , the JTWC upgraded Krosa to typhoon status , and the next day , both PAGASA and JMA followed suit . On October 31 , Krosa made landfall in northeastern Luzon near Cagayan , and developed a symmetric eyewall while initially moving over land . Land interaction weakened the eye by the time Krosa emerged into the South China Sea late on October 31 . The next day , PAGASA discontinued advisories after the typhoon exited the region . Convection rebuilt around the center , with continued favorable conditions allowing for restrengthening .
 Late on November 1 , a large eye redeveloped , and the JTWC estimated Krosa attained peak 1 minute sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Early the next day , the JMA also estimated the typhoon reached peak 10 minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Later , increasing wind shear caused the eye to deteriorate , and Krosa began slowing about 260 km ( 160 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Hong Kong after reaching the western edge of the subtropical ridge . After remaining nearly stationary , Krosa began moving steadily to the west @-@ southwest due to a new ridge . The convection continued to weaken due to continued shear and cooler waters from upwelling , and Krosa deteriorated to tropical storm status on November 3 . The next day , the JTWC issued its final advisory after the circulation became exposed from the convection . Also on November 4 , the JMA downgraded Krosa to tropical depression status off the northeast Vietnam coast . The system dissipated at 0000 UTC on November 5 .

 = = Preparations and impact = =

 Before Krosa struck the Philippines , PAGASA issued a number 3 warning signal for portions of northern Luzon , where winds were expected to reach over 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) . The agency noted for the potential for flooding and landslides . High winds knocked down trees across Luzon , and left about 80 % of Cagayan province without power , as well as some areas without internet or cellphone service . Portions of the Pan @-@ Philippine Highway were blocked , and in Lal @-@ Lo , Cagayan , a car crashed into a gasoline truck due to power outages . Agriculture damage was estimated at P273 million ( PHP , $ 6 @.@ 3 million USD ) , occurring just before the start of the harvest . Across the island , the typhoon damaged 32 @,@ 745 houses , including 3 @,@ 837 that were destroyed , forcing 65 @,@ 648 people to evacuate to storm shelters . Overall , Krosa killed four people in the Philippines , and left P273 million ( PHP , $ 6 @.@ 4 million USD ) in damage . After the storm , workers quickly restored power lines , while the government provided monetary assistance to storm @-@ ravaged families , after Cagayan was declared a state of calamity . Members of the Philippine military and Department of Public Works and Highways worked to clean up following the storm .
 The China National Meteorological Centre issued a " yellow alert " , the second @-@ lowest of the four level warning system , for Hainan due to the threat of the storm . The agency recommended boats to return to port . Agencies in Vietnam also warned for the potential of heavy rainfall due to the dissipating Tropical Depression Krosa , and released water from three dams to prevent overflow .


 = Kirby 's Block Ball =

 Kirby 's Block Ball is a 1995 action video game , a spin @-@ off from the Kirby series for the Game Boy portable console . It is a Breakout clone ; the player controls paddles along the screen 's edge to knock a bouncing ball , Kirby , into destructible bricks . The game 's 55 levels include power @-@ ups , bonus rounds , and minigames . Kirby 's Block Ball was developed by HAL Laboratory and Nintendo R & D1 . The team spent half a year revising the gameplay to match Kirby 's signature characteristics . Kirby 's Block Ball was published by Nintendo first in Japan in 1995 , later in Europe , and last in North America in 1996 .
 Reviewers considered the game an improvement on the Breakout formula and praised its gameplay craftsmanship and incorporation of the Kirby series . It was included in multiple top Game Boy game lists and was later emulated on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console .

 = = Gameplay = =

 The player controls paddles along the screen 's edges to knock a bouncing ball , Kirby , into destructible bricks . The player loses a life if Kirby hits the edge of the screen . Each of the game 's eleven stages include five rounds of increasingly complex block patterns for Kirby to clear . The ten different block types vary in durability and points value . A well @-@ timed hit of the paddle gives Kirby a powerful bounce to break through harder blocks . Another block type turns the remaining blocks into a bonus round that rewards the player for clearing the screen in the least amount of time . The player can find warp stars that lead to minigames , such as air hockey , where the player can earn extra lives . The rounds also include enemies to attack and avoid . Some enemies contain bonus items . Each stage ends in a boss fight .
 With stone , needle , flame , and spark power @-@ ups , Kirby can transform to interact with blocks differently . For instance , the spark power @-@ up lets Kirby break through otherwise indestructible blocks , and the needle lets Kirby hit spikes once without losing a life . The game has a themed frame and uses a wide palette of colors in @-@ game when played with the Super Game Boy .

 = = Development = =

 The game was developed by HAL Laboratory with Gunpei Yokoi 's Nintendo R & D1 , and published by Nintendo . At one point in development , HAL decided that the game did not feel like a Kirby game . The team spent six months completely revising the game under explicit instructions on how Kirby should move . Kirby games contain elements of unrestricted , creative movement as a general theme . Kirby 's Block Ball was released for the Game Boy first in Japan in 1995 and later in Europe ( 1995 ) and North America ( May 1996 ) . It was later emulated on the Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console , and released first in Japan ( October 2011 ) and later in Europe ( February 2012 ) and North America ( May 2012 ) .

 = = Reception and legacy = =

 On release , the four reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly applauded Kirby 's Block Ball for modifying the Breakout formula to create a new and enjoyable game . They especially praised the unique power @-@ ups , though Crispin Boyer and Sushi X also felt the game was too short and easy . Nintendo Power said they enjoyed Block Ball and its number of stages , but wondered how its eight megabits of memory were being used . The magazine found the parts where Kirby eats the unbreakable blocks to be innovative . All six of the magazine 's reviewers recommended the game .
 IGN wrote that the game was primarily remembered as " an Arkanoid or Breakout clone skinned with the Kirby franchise " . IGN calculated an average reviewer score of 7 @.@ 4 / 10 . The Kirby series became known for its number of non @-@ platformer spin @-@ offs , of which Block Ball was one , like Kirby 's Pinball Land and Kirby 's Dream Course . Kirby 's spherical shape lent itself towards ball @-@ like roles . IGN wrote that Block Ball was the first " truly out there " Kirby spin @-@ off , but that the game was too short .
 Planet Game Boy called it one of the original Game Boy 's ten " all @-@ time classics " and GamesRadar placed it among the top 25 Game Boy games released . They considered Kirby 's Block Ball an improvement upon Alleyway , a Game Boy launch title and Breakout clone . IGN recommended the game upon its 3DS rerelease both in general and for Breakout fans . Nintendo World Report recommended the game to players who like score attack games and called it the best version of Breakout released . Retrospective reviewers found the game enjoyable and praised the craft behind the gameplay and Kirby themes . Alternatively , Kirby 's Block Ball received the lowest rating on Tim Rogers 's 2004 " Yamanote Scoring System for Portable Games " ( a metric by which he played a game while counting stops on the circular Yamanote train line until he lost interest ) with a score of " one " stop . He called it " too damned bland " .
 In a retrospective review , Jeuxvideo.com had high praise for the level design , graphics , and animations . They also found the music excellent in comparison to the annoying and repetitive soundtrack of most Breakout clones . The magazine also liked how the game fit the Kirby universe , apart from its increased difficulty — Jeuxvideo.com occasionally had trouble hitting the slow @-@ paced ball with precision .


 = Hannah Dodd =

 Hannah Dodd ( born 27 April 1992 ) is an Australian Grade IV equestrian and 2 @.@ 0 point wheelchair basketball player who represented Australia in equestrian at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , coming 11th and 12th in her events . Switching to wheelchair basketball , she made her debut with the national team at the Osaka Cup in February 2015 .
 In 2008 , Dodd was the Australian national Grade IV para @-@ equestrian champion . She was runner @-@ up in 2009 , and won the Australian national championships again in 2011 , along with the Oceania Championships and the National Titles team events . By 2012 , she was the top @-@ ranked Australian competitor in her event and class .
 After the London Paralympics , Dodd took up wheelchair basketball . She started playing for the Sydney University Flames in the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League in 2013 , made her debut with the national team at the Osaka Friendship Games in Osaka in February 2015 , winning bronze , and was part of the Under 25 team at the 2015 Women 's U25 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship in Beijing in July 2015 , winning silver .

 = = Personal = =

 Hannah Dodd was born on 27 April 1992 , and is from Arcadia , New South Wales . She has sacral agenesis and spina bifida with upper limb dystonia , and is missing four vertebrae in her back . When she was about a year old , her kidneys started failing . Her entire renal system needed to be reconstructed . She has two older brothers . She can walk with the aide of a caliper , and also uses a wheelchair . As of 2012 , she is a horse riding teacher and student at the University of Western Sydney where she is majoring in sports and exercise science .

 = = Equestrian = =

 Dodd is a Grade IV equestrian competitor , coached by Peter Turner . Due to her sacral agenesis , when she rides her horse , she dislocates several bones every time , but as a result of anti @-@ doping rules , she has had to find alternative ways of coping with pain associated with riding .
 Dodd has been around horses since she was four months old , and was able to ride on her own by the time she was two years old , before she learned to walk . The sport gave her a degree of independence . She started competing in 2005 , and first represented Australia in 2006 , winning her first test in England that year.In 2008 , she became the youngest @-@ ever winner of the Australian national championships . She finished first at the March 2009 inter @-@ schools cup at the St Ives Showground , and second at the 2009 Australian national championships , but her horse , Lucifer 's Dream , was injured in 2009 . In 2009 and 2010 , she searched for another horse to assist her in getting through Paralympic qualification . She won the Australian national championships again in 2011 , along with the Oceania Championships and the National Titles team events . By 2012 , she was the top @-@ ranked Australian competitor in her event and class .
 Dodd was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London in equestrian events with her horse Waikiwi . These Games were her first , and she was the youngest Australian equestrian competitor . A fund raiser was organised by Arcadia , New South Wales , residents . While her own costs and the cost of her horse were covered by Australian Paralympic Committee and Equestrian Australia , funds were required for her coach . She was placed 12th in the Individual Championship Test – Grade IV , and 11th in the Individual Freestyle Test – Grade IV and Team Test – Grade IV .

 = = Wheelchair basketball = =

 After the London Paralympics , Dodd took up wheelchair basketball . She started for the Sydney University Flames in the Women 's National Wheelchair Basketball League in 2013 . She has to strap her fingers and wrists , and usually dislocates a shoulder during a game . " I 've had a few bangs and scrapes and been tipped out of my chair a few times , " she concedes , " but it 's really fun . The fast pace really gives you an adrenalin kick and the girls I play with are awesome . " " If I have chose between my two sports for Rio , " she said , " I will go with basketball . " She made her debut with the national team , known as the Gliders , at the Osaka Cup in Osaka in February 2015 . The Gliders won bronze . In June 2015 , Dodd was selected as part of the under 25 team ( known as the Devils ) for the 2015 Women 's U25 Wheelchair Basketball World Championship in Beijing in July . The Devils won silver . By this time her health had deteriorated . She had to use a wheelchair much of the time , and her classification had dropped to a 2 @.@ 5 point player . In 2015 , she was reclassified a 2 @.@ 0 .


 = Commonwealth War Graves Commission =

 The Commonwealth War Graves Commission ( CWGC ) is an intergovernmental organisation of six independent member states whose principal function is to mark , record and maintain the graves and places of commemoration of Commonwealth of Nations military service members who died in the two World Wars . The Commission is also responsible for commemorating Commonwealth civilians who died as a result of enemy action during World War II . The Commission was founded by Fabian Ware and constituted through Royal Charter in 1917 named the Imperial War Graves Commission . The change to the present name took place in 1960 .
 The Commission , as part of its mandate , is responsible for commemorating all Commonwealth war dead individually and equally . To this end , the war dead are commemorated by name on a headstone , at an identified site of a burial , or on a memorial . War dead are commemorated uniformly and equally , irrespective of military or civil rank , race or creed .
 The Commission is currently responsible for the continued commemoration of 1 @.@ 7 million deceased Commonwealth military service members in 153 countries . Since its inception , the Commission has constructed approximately 2 @,@ 500 war cemeteries and numerous memorials . The Commission is currently responsible for the care of war dead at over 23 @,@ 000 separate burial sites and the maintenance of more than 200 memorials worldwide . In addition to commemorating Commonwealth military service members , the Commission maintains , under arrangement with applicable governments , over 40 @,@ 000 non @-@ Commonwealth war graves and over 25 @,@ 000 non @-@ war military and civilian graves . The Commission operates through the continued financial support of the member states : United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , India and South Africa . The current President of the Commonwealth War Graves Commission is Prince Edward , Duke of Kent .

 = = History = =


 = = = World War I = = =

 On the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , Fabian Ware , a director of the Rio Tinto Company , found that at 45 years old he was too old to join the British Army . He used the influence of Rio Tinto chairman , Viscount Milner , to become the commander of a mobile unit of the British Red Cross . He arrived in France in September 1914 and whilst there was struck by the lack of any official mechanism for documenting or marking the location of graves of those who had been killed and felt compelled to create an organisation within the Red Cross for this purpose . In March 1915 , with the support of Nevil Macready , Adjutant @-@ General of the British Expeditionary Force , Ware 's work was given official recognition and support by the Imperial War Office and the unit was transferred to the British Army as the Graves Registration Commission . The new Graves Registration Commission had over 31 @,@ 000 graves of British and Imperial soldiers registered by October 1915 and 50 @,@ 000 registered by May 1916 .
 When municipal graveyards began to overfill Ware began negotiations with various local authorities to acquire land for further cemeteries . Ware began with an agreement with France to build joint British and French cemeteries under the understanding that these would be maintained by the French government . Ware eventually concluded that it was not prudent to leave the maintenance responsibilities solely to the French government and subsequently arranged for France to purchase the land , grant it in perpetuity , and leave the management and maintenance responsibilities to the British . The French government agreed under the condition that cemeteries respected certain dimensions , were accessible by public road , were in the vicinity of medical aid stations and were not too close to towns or villages . Similar negotiations were started with the Belgian government .
 As reports of the grave registration work became public , the Commission began to receive letters of enquiry and requests for photographs of graves from relatives of deceased soldiers . By 1917 , 17 @,@ 000 photographs had been dispatched to relatives . In March 1915 , the Commission , with the support of the Red Cross , began to dispatch photographic prints and cemetery location information in answer to the requests . The Graves Registration Commission became the Directorate of Graves Registration and Enquiries in the spring of 1916 in recognition of the fact that the scope of work began to extend beyond simple grave registration and began to include responding to enquiries from relatives of those killed . The directorate 's work was also extended beyond the Western Front and into other theatres of war , with units deployed in Greece , Egypt and Mesopotamia .

 = = = Formal establishment = = =

 As the war continued , Ware and others became concerned about the fate of the graves in the post @-@ war period . Following a suggestion by the British Army , the National Committee for the Care of Soldiers ' Graves was appointed by the British government in January 1916 , with Edward , Prince of Wales agreeing to serve as president . The National Committee for the Care of Soldiers ' Graves was created with the intention of taking over the work of the Directorate of Graves Registration and Enquiries after the war . The government felt that it was more appropriate to entrust the work to a specially appointed body rather than to any existing government department . By early 1917 a number of members of the committee believed a formal imperial organisation would be needed to care for the graves . With the help of Edward , Prince of Wales , Ware submitted a memorandum to the Imperial War Conference in 1917 suggesting that an imperial organisation be constituted . The suggestion was accepted and on 21 May 1917 the Imperial War Graves Commission was established by Royal Charter , with the Prince of Wales serving as president , Secretary of State for War Lord Derby as chairman and Ware as vice @-@ chairman . The Commission 's undertakings began in earnest at the end of the First World War . Once land for cemeteries and memorials had been guaranteed , the enormous task of recording the details of the dead could begin . By 1918 , some 587 @,@ 000 graves had been identified and a further 559 @,@ 000 casualties were registered as having no known grave .
 The scale , and associated high number of casualties , of the war produced an entirely new attitude towards the commemoration of war dead . Previous to World War I , individual commemoration of war dead was often on an ad hoc basis and was almost exclusively limited to commissioned officers . However , the war required mobilisation of a significant percentage of the population , either as volunteers or through conscription . An expectation had consequently arisen that individual soldiers would expect to be commemorated , even if they were low @-@ ranking members of the military . A committee under Frederic Kenyon , Director of the British Museum , presented a report to the Commission in November 1918 detailing how it envisioned the development of the cemeteries . Two key elements of this report were that bodies should not be repatriated and that uniform memorials should be used to avoid class distinctions . Beyond the logistical nightmare of returning home so many corpses , it was felt that repatriation would conflict with the feeling of brotherhood that had developed between serving ranks .
 An article in The Times on 17 February 1919 by Rudyard Kipling carried the Commission 's proposal to a wider audience and described what the graves would look like . The article entitled War Graves : Work of Imperial Commission : Mr. Kipling 's Survey was quickly republished as an illustrated booklet , Graves of the Fallen . The illustrated booklet was intended to soften the impact of Kenyon 's report as it included illustrations of cemeteries with mature trees and shrubs ; contrasting the bleak landscapes depicted in published battlefield photos . There was an immediate public outcry following the publication of the reports , particularly with regards to the decision to not repatriate the bodies of the dead . The reports generated considerable discussion in the press which ultimately led to a heated debate in Parliament on 4 May 1920 . Sir James Remnant started the debate , followed by speeches by William Burdett @-@ Coutts in favour of the Commission 's principles and Robert Cecil speaking for those desiring repatriation and opposing uniformity of grave markers . Winston Churchill closed the debate and asked that the issue not proceed to a vote . Remnant withdrew his motion , allowing the Commission to carry out its work assured of support for its principles .

 = = = First cemeteries and memorials to the missing = = =

 Three of the most eminent architects of their day , Sir Herbert Baker , Sir Reginald Blomfield , and Sir Edwin Lutyens were commissioned to design the cemeteries and memorials . Rudyard Kipling was appointed literary advisor for the language used for memorial inscriptions .
 In 1920 , the Commission built three experimental cemeteries at Le Treport , Forceville and Louvencourt , following the principles outlined in the Kenyon report . Of these , the Forceville Communal Cemetery and Extension was agreed to be the most successful . Having consulted with garden designer Gertrude Jekyll , the architects created a walled cemetery with uniform headstones in a garden setting , augmented by Blomfield 's Cross of Sacrifice and Lutyens ' Stone of Remembrance . After some adjustments , Forceville became the template for the Commission 's building programme . Adjustments were required because all three experimental cemeteries went over budget . To ensure future cemeteries remained within their budget the Commission decided to not build shelters in cemeteries that contained less than 200 graves , to not place a Stone of Remembrance in any cemetery with less than 400 graves , and to limit the height of cemetery walls to 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) .
 At the end of 1919 , the Commission had spent £ 7 @,@ 500 , and this figure rose to £ 250 @,@ 000 in 1920 as construction of cemeteries and memorials increased . By 1921 , the Commission had established 1 @,@ 000 cemeteries which were ready for headstone erections , and burials . Between 1920 and 1923 , the Commission was shipping 4 @,@ 000 headstones a week to France . In many cases small cemeteries were closed and the graves concentrated in larger ones . By 1927 , when the majority of construction had been completed , over 500 cemeteries had been built , with 400 @,@ 000 headstones , a thousand Crosses of Sacrifice , and 400 Stones of Remembrance .
 The Commission had also been mandated to individually commemorate each soldier who had no known grave , which amounted to 315 @,@ 000 in France and Belgium alone . The Commission initially decided to build 12 monuments on which to commemorate the missing ; each memorial being located at the site of an important battle along the Western Front . After resistance from the French committee responsible for the approvals of memorials on French territory , the Commission revised their plan and reduced the number of memorials , and in some cases built memorials to the missing in existing cemeteries rather than as separate structures .
 Reginald Blomfield 's Menin Gate was the first memorial to the missing located in Europe to be completed , and was unveiled on 24 July 1927 . The Menin Gate ( Menenpoort ) was found to have insufficient space to contain all the names as originally planned and 34 @,@ 984 names of the missing were instead inscribed on Herbert Baker 's Tyne Cot Memorial to the Missing . Other memorials followed : the Helles Memorial in Gallipoli designed by John James Burnet ; the Thiepval Memorial on the Somme and the Arras Memorial designed by Edwin Lutyens ; and the Basra Memorial in Iraq designed by Edward Prioleau Warren . The Dominions and India also erected memorials on which they commemorated their missing : the Neuve @-@ Chapelle Memorial for the forces of India , the Vimy Memorial by Canada , the Villers @-@ Bretonneux Memorial by Australia , the Delville Wood Memorial by South Africa and the Beaumont @-@ Hamel Memorial by Newfoundland . The programme of commemorating the dead of the Great War was considered essentially complete with the inauguration of the Thiepval Memorial in 1932 , though the Vimy Memorial would not be finished until 1936 , the Villers @-@ Bretonneux Memorial until 1938 and stonemasons were still conducting work on the Menin Gate when Germany invaded Belgium in 1940 .
 The only memorial created by the Commission that was not in the form of a monument or cemetery was the Opththalmic Institute at Giza , Egypt — complete with library , and bacteriology and pathology departments — as its memorial to men of the Egyptian Labour Corps and Camel Transport Corps . Its erection was agreed with local political pressure .

 = = = World War II = = =

 From the start of the Second World War in 1939 , the Commission organised grave registration units and , planning ahead based on the experience gained from the First World War , earmarked land for use as cemeteries . When the war began turning in favour of the Allies , the Commission was able to begin restoring its First World War cemeteries and memorials . It also began the task of commemorating the 600 @,@ 000 Commonwealth casualties from the Second World War . In 1949 , the Commission completed Dieppe Canadian War Cemetery , the first of 559 new cemeteries and 36 new memorials . Eventually , over 350 @,@ 000 new headstones were erected . Many were made from Hopton Wood stone . The wider scale of World War II , coupled with manpower shortages and unrest in some countries , meant that the construction and restoration programmes took much longer . Following the war , the Commission implemented a five @-@ year horticultural renovation programme . The horticultural neglect was largely addressed by 1950 but there were necessary structural repairs to be made . These , together with the backlog of maintenance tasks from before the war , took a further 10 years to complete and the programme was not completed until the 1960s .
 With the increased number of civilian casualties compared with the World War I , Winston Churchill agreed to Ware 's proposal that the Commission also maintain a record of Commonwealth civilian war deaths . A supplemental chapter was added to the Imperial War Graves Commission 's charter on 7 February 1941 , empowering the organisation to collect and record the names of civilians who died from enemy action during the Second World War , which resulted in the creation of the Civilian War Dead Roll of Honour . The roll eventually contained the names of nearly 67 @,@ 000 civilians . The Commission and the Dean of Westminster reached an agreement that the roll would eventually be placed in Westminster Abbey but not until the roll was complete and hostilities had ended . The Commission handed over the first six volumes to the Dean of Westminster on 21 February 1956 ; the final volume was added to the showcase in 1958 .

 = = = Post – World War II = = =

 Following World War II the Commission recognised that the word ' Imperial ' within its name was no longer appropriate . In the spirit of strengthening national and regional feelings the organisation 's name was changed to Commonwealth War Graves Commission in 1960 .
 More recent conflicts have sometimes made it impossible for the Commission to care for cemeteries in a given region or resulted in the destruction of sites altogether . Zehrensdorf Indian Cemetery in Germany was unkempt after the end of World War II and until the German reunification because it was located in an area occupied by Russian forces and was not entirely rebuilt until 2005 . The Six @-@ Day War and War of Attrition resulted in the destruction of Port Tewfik Memorial and Aden Memorial , and the death of a Commission gardener at Suez War Memorial Cemetery . During the Lebanese Civil War two cemeteries in Beirut were destroyed and had to be rebuilt . The maintenance of war graves and memorials in Iraq has remained difficult since Iran – Iraq War in the 1980s , with regular maintenance being impractical since after the Gulf War .
 The Commission has , and continues to , also provide support for war graves outside its traditional mandate . In 1982 , the British Ministry of Defence requested the Commission 's assistance to design and construct cemeteries in the Falkland Islands for those killed during the Falklands War . Although these cemeteries are not Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemeteries , the Commission manages the administrative responsibilities of these cemeteries . Since 2005 , the Commission has carried out similar management duties on behalf of the British Ministry of Defence for cemeteries and graves of British and Imperial soldiers who died during the Second Boer War . In 2003 , Veterans Affairs Canada employed the Commission to develop an approach to locate grave markers for which the Canadian Minister of Veterans Affairs has responsibility . As of 2011 , the Commission conducts a twelve @-@ year cyclical inspection programme of Canadian veterans ' markers installed at the expense of the Government of Canada .
 In 2008 , an exploratory excavation discovered mass graves on the edge of Pheasant Wood outside of Fromelles . Two @-@ hundred and fifty British and Australian bodies were excavated from five mass graves which were interred in the newly constructed Fromelles ( Pheasant Wood ) Military Cemetery . This was the first new Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemetery in more than 50 years , the last such cemeteries having been built after the Second World War .

 = = Burial sites and memorials = =

 The Commission is currently responsible for the continued commemoration of 1 @.@ 7 million deceased Commonwealth military service members in 153 countries and approximately 67 @,@ 000 civilians who died as a result of enemy action during World War II . Commonwealth military service members are commemorated by name on either a headstone , at an identified site of a burial , or on a memorial . As a result , the Commission is currently responsible for the care of war dead at over 23 @,@ 000 separate burial sites and maintenance of more than 200 memorials worldwide . The vast majority of burial sites are pre @-@ existing communal or municipal cemeteries and parish churchyards located in the United Kingdom , however the Commission has itself constructed approximately 2 @,@ 500 war cemeteries worldwide . The Commission has also constructed or commissioned memorials to commemorate the dead who have no known grave ; the largest of these is the Thiepval Memorial .

 = = = Qualifications for inclusion = = =

 The Commission only commemorates those who have died during the designated war years , while in Commonwealth military service or of causes attributable to service . The applicable periods of consideration are 4 August 1914 to 31 August 1921 for the First World War and 3 September 1939 to 31 December 1947 for the Second World War . The end date for the First World War period is the official end of the war , while for the Second World War the Commission selected a date approximately the same period after VE Day as the official end of the First World War was after the 1918 Armistice .
 Civilians who died as a result of enemy action during the Second World War are commemorated differently from those that died as a result of military service . They are commemorated by name through the Civilian War Dead Roll of Honour located in St George 's Chapel in Westminster Abbey . In addition to its mandated duties , the Commission maintains , under arrangement with applicable governments , over 40 @,@ 000 non @-@ Commonwealth war graves and over 25 @,@ 000 non @-@ war military and civilian graves .

 = = = Architects and sculptors = = =

 As well as the main Principal Architects for France and Belgium ( Baker , Blomfield and Lutyens ) , there were Principal Architects appointed for other regions as well . Sir Robert Lorimer was Principal Architect for Italy , Macedonia and Egypt , while Sir John James Burnet was Principal Architect for Palestine and Gallipoli , assisted by Thomas Smith Tait . The Principal Architect for Mesopotamia was Edward Prioleau Warren .
 As well as these senior architects , there was a team of Assistant Architects who were actually responsible for many of the cemetery and memorial designs . These architects were younger , and many of them had served in the war . The Assistant Architects were : George Esselmont Gordon Leith , Wilfred Clement von Berg , Charles Henry Holden ( who in 1920 became a Principal Architect ) , William Harrison Cowlishaw , William Bryce Binnie , George Hartley Goldsmith , Frank Higginson , Arthur James Scott Hutton , Noel Ackroyd Rew , and John Reginald Truelove . Other architects that worked for the Commission , or won competitions for the Commission memorials , included George Salway Nicol , Harold Chalton Bradshaw , Verner Owen Rees , Gordon H. Holt , and Henry Philip Cart de Lafontaine .
 In January 1944 , Edward Maufe was appointed Principal Architect for the UK . Maufe worked extensively for the Commission for 25 years until 1969 , becoming Chief Architect and also succeeding Kenyon as Artistic Advisor . Together with Maufe , the other Principal Architects appointed during and after the Second World War were Hubert Worthington , Louis de Soissons , Philip Hepworth and Colin St Clair Oakes .
 Leading sculptors that worked on the memorials and cemeteries after the First World War included Eric Henri Kennington , Charles Thomas Wheeler , Gilbert Ledward , and Charles Sargeant Jagger . Other sculptors , both in the inter @-@ war period and after the Second World War , included William Reid Dick , Ernest Gillick , Basil Gotto , Alfred Turner , Laurence A. Turner , Walter Gilbert , Henry Poole , Vernon Hill , Robert Anning Bell , Ferdinand Victor Blundstone , Joseph Armitage , and Gilbert Bayes .

 = = = Cemetery design = = =


 = = = = Common architectural design features = = = =

 Structural design has always played an important part in the Commission 's cemeteries . Apart from a few exceptions , due to local geological conditions , the cemeteries follow the same design and uniform aesthetic all over the world . This makes the cemeteries easily recognisable and distinguishes them from war graves administered by other groups or countries .
 A typical cemetery is surrounded by a low wall or hedge and with a wrought @-@ iron gate entrance . For cemeteries in France and Belgium , a land tablet near the entrance or along a wall identifies the cemetery grounds as having been provided by the French or Belgian governments . All but the smallest cemeteries contain a register with an inventory of the burials , a plan of the plots and rows , and a basic history of the cemetery . The register is located within a metal cupboard that is marked with a cross located in either the wall near the cemetery entrance or in a shelter within the cemetery . More recently , in larger sites , a stainless steel notice gives details of the respective military campaign . The headstones within the cemetery are of a uniform size and design and mark plots of equal size .
 The cemetery grounds are , except in drier climates , grass covered with a floral border around the headstones . There is also an absence of any paving between the headstone rows which is intended to make the cemetery feel like a traditional walled garden where visitors could experience a sense of peace . However , Carter and Jackson argue that the uniform aesthetics are designed to evoke a positive experience which deliberately masks and sanitises the nature of the war deaths .

 = = = = Cross of Sacrifice and Stone of Remembrance = = = =

 Typically , cemeteries of more than 40 graves contain a Cross of Sacrifice designed by architect Reginald Blomfield . This cross was designed to imitate medieval crosses found in churchyards in England with proportions more commonly seen in the Celtic cross . The cross is normally a freestanding four @-@ point limestone Latin cross , mounted on an octagonal base , and ranging in height from 14 to 32 feet . A bronze longsword , blade down , is embedded on the face of the cross . This cross represents the faith of the majority of the dead and the sword represents the military character of the cemetery , intended to link British soldiers and the Christian concept of self @-@ sacrifice .
 Cemeteries with more than 1000 burials typically have a Stone of Remembrance , designed by Edwin Lutyens with the inscription " Their Name Liveth for Evermore " . The concept of the Stone of Remembrance stone was developed by Rudyard Kipling to commemorate those of all faiths and none respectively . In contrast to the Cross of Sacrifice , the design for the stone deliberately avoided " shapes associated with particular religions " . The geometry of the structure was based on studies of the Parthenon . Each stone is 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) long and 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The shape of the stone has been compared both to that of a sarcophagus and an altar . The feature was designed using the principle of entasis . The subtle curves in the design , if extended , would form a sphere 1 @,@ 801 feet 8 inches ( 549 @.@ 15 m ) in diameter .

 = = = = Headstones = = = =

 Every grave is marked with a headstone . Each headstone contains the national emblem or regimental badge , rank , name , unit , date of death and age of each casualty inscribed above an appropriate religious symbol and a more personal dedication chosen by relatives . The headstones use a standard upper case lettering designed by MacDonald Gill . Individual graves are arranged , where possible , in straight rows and marked by uniform headstones , the vast majority of which are made of Portland stone . The original headstone dimensions were 76 centimetres ( 30 in ) tall , 38 cm ( 15 in ) wide , and 7 @.@ 6 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) thick .
 Most headstones are inscribed with a cross , except for those deceased known to be atheist or non @-@ Christian . In the case of burials of Victoria Cross or George Cross recipients , the regimental badge is supplemented by the Victoria Cross or George Cross emblem . Sometimes a soldier employed a pseudonym because they were too young to serve or were sought by law enforcement ; in such cases their primary name is shown along with the notation " served as " . Many headstones are for unidentified casualties ; they consequently bear only what could be discovered from the body . The epitaph , developed by Rudyard Kipling , that appears on the graves of unidentified soldiers for which no details are known is " A Soldier of the Great War known unto God " . Some headstones bear the text " believed to be buried in this cemetery " when they are believed to be buried in the cemetery but the exact location of the grave is not known . In some cases soldiers were buried in collective graves and distinguishing one body from another was not possible and thus one headstone covers more than one grave . The headstone does not denote any specific details of the death except for its date , and even then only if it is known , and are deliberately ambiguous about the cause of death .
 Due to local conditions it was sometimes necessary for the Commission to deviate from its standard design . In places prone to extreme weather or earthquakes , such as Thailand and Turkey , stone @-@ faced pedestal markers are used instead of the normal headstones . These measures are intended to prevent masonry being damaged during earthquakes or sinking into sodden ground . In Italy headstones were carved from Chiampo Perla limestone because it was in more plentiful supply . In Struma Military Cemetery , in Greece , to avoid risk of earthquake damage , small headstones are laid flat on the ground . The smaller size of the markers mean that they often lack unit insignia .

 = = = = Horticulture = = = =

 Commission cemeteries are distinctive in treating floriculture as an integral part of the cemetery design . Originally , the horticultural concept was to create an environment where visitors could experience a sense of peace in a setting , in contrast to traditionally bleak graveyards . Recommendations given by Arthur William Hill , the Assistant Director of the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew enabled the Commission to develop cemetery layouts and architectural structures that took into account the placement of suitable plant life . Combining structural and horticultural elements was not unfamiliar to the Commission 's architects . Sir Edwin Lutyens furthered his long @-@ standing working relationship with horticulturist Gertrude Jekyll , whose devotion to traditional cottage garden plants and roses greatly influenced the appearance of the cemeteries . Where possible , indigenous plants were utilised to enhance sentimental associations with the gardens of home .
 Variety in texture , height and timing of floral display were equally important horticultural considerations . The beds around each headstone are planted with a mixture of floribunda roses and herbaceous perennials . Low @-@ growing plants are chosen for areas immediately in front of headstones , ensuring that inscriptions are not obscured and preventing soil from splashing back during rain . In cemeteries where there are pedestal grave markers , dwarf varieties of plants are used instead .
 The absence of any form of paving between the headstone rows contributes to the simplicity of the cemetery designs . Lawn paths add to the garden ambiance , and are irrigated during the dry season in countries where there is insufficient rain . Where irrigation is inappropriate or impractical , dry landscaping is an ecological alternative favoured by the Commission 's horticulturists , as is the case in Iraq . Drier areas require a different approach not only for lawns , but also to plants and styles of planting . Similarly , there are separate horticultural considerations in tropical climates . When many cemeteries are concentrated within a limited area , like along the Western Front or Gallipoli peninsula , mobile teams of gardeners operate from a local base . Elsewhere , larger cemeteries have their own dedicated staff while small cemeteries are usually tended by a single gardener working part @-@ time .

 = = Organisation = =


 = = = Commissioners = = =

 The affairs of the CWGC are overseen by a Board of Commissioners . The president of the board is Prince Edward , Duke of Kent , the chairman is United Kingdom Secretary of State for Defence Michael Fallon and the vice @-@ chairman Vice @-@ Admiral Tim Laurence . The members are : the High Commissioner for New Zealand to the United Kingdom Lockwood Smith , the High Commissioners of Australia to the United Kingdom Alexander Downer , the Acting High Commissioner of the Republic of South Africa to the United Kingdom Obed Mlaba , the High Commissioner for India to the United Kingdom Ranjan Mathai , the High Commissioner for Canada to the United Kingdom Gordon Campbell , Hew Strachan , Keith Simpson , Kevan Jones , Edward Chaplin , Robert Fox , Ros Kelly and Lieutenant General Bill Rollo . Victoria Wallace is the Director @-@ General of the CWGC and serves as secretary . The board also has an Honorary Artistic Adviser , Peter Inskip .

 = = = Functional structure = = =

 The CWGC is headquartered in Maidenhead , England . Offices or agencies that are each responsible for a specific geographical area manage the worldwide affairs of the organisation . They are :
 France Area is headed by a director and is responsible for France ( including the island of Corsica ) , Monaco and Switzerland .
 Northern Europe Area , headed by a director and responsible for Austria , Belgium , Czech Republic , Denmark , Estonia , Germany , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Luxembourg , Netherlands , Norway , Poland and Sweden .
 United Kingdom Area , headed by a director and responsible for Channel Islands , Faroe Islands , Iceland , Ireland , Isle of Man and the United Kingdom
 Mediterranean Area headed by a director and responsible for Albania , Algeria , Azerbaijan , Azores , Bahrain , Canary Islands , Croatia , Cyprus , Egypt , Gibraltar , Greece , Israel and Palestine , Italy , Jordan , Lebanon , Libya , Macedonia , Madeira , Malta , Mauritania , Morocco , Oman , Portugal , San Marino , Saudi Arabia , Serbia , Spain , Syria , Tunisia , Turkey , United Arab Emirates and Yemen
 Canadian Agency is headed by a secretary @-@ general and responsible for Canada , the entire Americas ( including the Caribbean )
 Australia , managed by the Office of Australian War Graves in the Australian Department of Veterans Affairs on behalf of the CWGC , is responsible for Australia , Norfolk Island , Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands
 New Zealand , managed by the New Zealand Ministry of Culture and Heritage on behalf of the CWGC , is responsible for New Zealand , New Caledonia , Samoa , Society Islands , Tonga and Vanuatu
 South Africa Agency is headed by a secretary and is responsible for Republic of South Africa , Namibia , Saint Helena and Ascension Island
 Africa , Asia and Pacific Area is headed by a director and is responsible for areas not covered by any of the other bodies .

 = = = Financing = = =

 The CWGC 's work is funded predominantly by grants from the governments of the six member states . In the fiscal year 2012 / 13 , these grants amounted to £ 58 @.@ 6 million of the organisation 's £ 66 @.@ 5 million of income . This equates to an approximate cost of C $ 85 per commemorated war dead . The contribution from each country is proportionate to the number of graves the CWGC maintains on behalf of that country . The percentage of total annual contributions for which each country is responsible is United Kingdom 78 @.@ 4 % , Canada 10 @.@ 1 % , Australia 6 @.@ 1 % , New Zealand 2 @.@ 1 % , South Africa 2 @.@ 1 % and India 1 @.@ 2 % .

 = = Ongoing projects and issues = =


 = = = War Graves Photographic Project = = =

 A project is underway to photograph the graves of and memorials to all service personnel from 1914 to the present day and make the images available to the public . The work is being carried out by The War Graves Photographic Project in conjunction with the CWGC . As of August 2013 , the project has recorded 1 @.@ 7 million photographs for posterity .

 = = = Reburials and identifications = = =

 Immediately following the First World War , the British Army remained responsible for the exhumation of remains . The Western Front was divided into sectors and combed for bodies by 12 @-@ man exhumation units . Between the Armistice and September 1921 , the exhumation units reburied 204 @,@ 695 bodies . After 1921 , no further widespread search for bodies was undertaken and in February 1921 responsibility of the cemeteries was transferred to the Commission . Despite the rigorous searches , bodies continued to be discovered in numbers . In the three years following the conclusion of the general search 38 @,@ 000 bodies were discovered . In the mid 1920s , 20 to 30 bodies were being discovered weekly .
 The discovery of remains of First and Second World War casualties remains a common occurrence with approximately 30 bodies discovered annually . For example , in 2006 eight bodies of Canadian soldiers from the 78th Battalion ( Winnipeg Grenadiers ) , CEF were discovered in a backyard in Hallu , France . In April 2013 , the remains of four British soldiers discovered by a French farmer clearing land with metal detector in 2009 were re @-@ interred at H.A.C. Cemetery near Arras , France . In March 2014 , the remains of 20 Commonwealth and 30 German soldiers were discovered in Vendin @-@ le @-@ Vieil , France with the Commonwealth soldiers being subsequently reburied at Loos British Cemetery .
 When the remains of a Commonwealth soldier from the First or Second World War is discovered the Commission is notified and a Commission burial officer tries to collect any associated artifacts that may help in identify the remains . The details are then registered and archived at the Commission 's headquarters. the collection of evidence can include artifacts with the remains , anthropological data and DNA . The archival records of the commission are open to the public to permit individuals to conduct their own research . Investigation of archival records by members of the public periodically result in the identification of previously buried casualties . In December 2013 , it was discovered that Second Lieutenant Philip Frederick Cormack , who was previously commemorated on the Arras Flying Services Memorial , had in fact been buried in a French military cemetery in Machelen , East @-@ Flanders in Belgium . Sergeant Leonard Maidment was identified in 2013 after a visitor to Marfaux British Cemetery discovered a headstone of an unknown sergeant with the Hampshire Regiment killed on 20 July 1918 and was subsequently able to show that only one sergeant from that regiment had been killed in France on that date .

 = = = Vandalism = = =

 Cemeteries , including those of war dead , are targets for vandalism . The gravestones , cemeteries and buildings of the Commission are no exception . The Commission believes that graffiti and damage to stonework are usually the pursuits partaken by young people , noting the number of incidents increases when schoolchildren are on school holidays . Determined thieves will also steal the bronze swords off the Cross of Sacrifice , which are now replaced with identical ones made in fibreglass .
 The vandalism of Commission cemeteries has also been connected to the participation of Commonwealth countries in contemporary conflicts . In the 1970s , in The Troubles , Commission cemeteries in Ireland experienced vandalism . Vandals defaced the central memorial of the Étaples Military Cemetery in northern France with anti @-@ British and anti @-@ American graffiti on 20 March 2003 immediately after the beginning of the Iraq War . On 9 May 2004 , thirty @-@ three headstones were demolished in the Gaza cemetery , which contains 3 @,@ 691 graves , allegedly in retaliation for the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse scandal . On 24 February 2012 , during the Libyan Civil War , an Islamist militia damaged over 200 headstones in the Benghazi war cemetery as well as the central memorial .


 = Tatwine =

 Tatwine or Tatwin ( Tatuini or Tadwinus ; c . 670 – 734 ) was the tenth Archbishop of Canterbury from 731 to 734 . Prior to becoming archbishop , he was a monk and abbot of a Benedictine monastery . Besides his ecclesiastical career , Tatwine was a writer , and riddles he composed survive . Another work he composed was on the grammar of the Latin language , which was aimed at advanced students of that language . He was subsequently considered a saint .

 = = Biography = =

 Tatwine was a Mercian by birth . His epigraph at Canterbury stated that when he died he was in old age , so perhaps he was born around 670 . He became a monk at the monastery at Breedon @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Hill in the present @-@ day County of Leicestershire , and then abbot of that house . Through the influence of King Æthelbald he was appointed as Archbishop of Canterbury in 731 and was consecrated on 10 June 731 . He was one of a number of Mercians who were appointed to Canterbury during the 730s and 740s . Apart from his consecration of the Bishops of Lindsey and Selsey in 733 , Tatwine 's period as archbishop appears to have been uneventful . He died in office on 30 July 734 . Later considered a saint , his feast day is 30 July .

 = = Writings = =

 Bede 's commentary on Tatwine calls him a " vir religione et Prudentia insignis , sacris quoque literis nobiliter instructus " ( a man notable for his prudence , devotion and learning ) . These qualities were displayed in the two surviving manuscripts of his riddles and four of his Ars Tatuini . The Ars is one of only two surviving 8th @-@ century Latin grammars from England , and was based on the works of Priscian and Consentius . The riddles deal with such diverse topics as philosophy and charity , the five senses and the alphabet , and a book and a pen . The riddles are formed in acrostics . The grammar is a reworking of Donatus 's Ars Minor with the addition of information drawn from other grammarians . It was not designed for a newcomer to the Latin language , but is designed for more advanced students . It covers the eight parts of speech through illustrations drawn from classical scholars , although not directly but through other grammatical works . There are also some examples drawn from the Psalms . The work was completed before he became archbishop , and was used not only in England but also on the continent . A recent edition of his works is Tatuini Opera omnia , published in 1968 with some translations into English and German from the original Latin .


 = German Type UB I submarine =

 The Type UB I was a class of small coastal submarines ( U @-@ boats ) built in Germany at the beginning of the First World War . 20 boats were constructed , most of which went into service with the German Imperial Navy . Boats of this design were also operated by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ( Kaiserliche und Königliche Kriegsmarine or K.u.K. Kriegsmarine ) and the Bulgarian Navy . The group is sometimes known as the UB @-@ 1 class after SM UB @-@ 1 , the class leader . In the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , it was called the U @-@ 10 class .
 Built to meet the need for small maneuverable submarines able to operate in the narrow , shallow seas off Flanders , the vessels were intended to be quickly constructed , then shipped by rail and assembled at their port of operation . The design effort began in mid @-@ August 1914 and by mid @-@ October the first 15 boats were ordered from two German shipyards . The German Imperial Navy subsequently ordered an additional pair of boats to replace two sold to Austria @-@ Hungary , who ordered a further three boats in April 1915 . A total of 20 UB Is were built . Construction of the first boats for Germany began in early November 1914 ; all 20 were completed by October 1915 . Several of the first boats underwent trials in German home waters , but the rest were assembled and tested at either Antwerp or Pola . The German boats operated primarily in the Flanders , Baltic , and Constantinople Flotillas . The boats were about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displaced 127 tonnes ( 125 long tons ) when surfaced and 142 tonnes ( 140 long tons ) while submerged . All had two bow torpedo tubes and two torpedoes , and were equipped with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun .
 In 1918 four of the surviving German boats were converted into coastal minelayers . Of the seventeen boats in German service , two were sold to Austria @-@ Hungary , one was sold to Bulgaria , and nine were lost during the war . One of the five Austro @-@ Hungarian boats was sunk and another mined and not repaired . The five surviving German boats , the four surviving Austro @-@ Hungarian boats , and the Bulgarian boat were all turned over to the Allies after the end of the war and were broken up .

 = = Design = =

 In the earliest stages of the First World War the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast found the German Imperial Navy without submarines suitable to operate in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . By 18 August 1914 , two weeks after the German invasion of Belgium , the planning of a series of small coastal submarines had already begun .
 The German Imperial Navy stipulated that the submarines must be transportable by rail , which imposed a maximum diameter of 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) . The rushed planning effort — which had been assigned the name " Project 34 " — resulted in the Type UB I design , created specifically for operation from Flanders . The boats were to be about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and to displace about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two bow torpedo tubes .
 Boats of the Type UB I design were built by two manufacturers , Germaniawerft of Kiel and AG Weser of Bremen , which led to some variations in boats from the two shipyards . The eight Germaniawerft @-@ built boats were slightly longer at 28 @.@ 10 metres ( 92 ft 2 in ) length overall , while the twelve Weser @-@ built boats came in 22 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) shorter than their counterparts . All were 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . The boats all displaced 127 tonnes ( 125 long tons ) while surfaced , but differed slightly in displacement submerged . The slightly longer Germaniawerft boats displaced 142 tonnes ( 140 long tons ) while submerged , as they weighed 1 tonne ( 0 @.@ 98 long tons ) more than the Weser boats .
 The drivetrain of the boats consisted of a single propeller shaft driven by a Daimler ( Germaniawerft ) or Körting ( Weser ) diesel engine on the surface , or a Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel . The Weser boats were capable of nearly 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ; 8 @.@ 6 mph ) on the surface and a little more than 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) submerged . The Germaniawerft boats were about 1 knot ( 1 @.@ 9 km / h ; 1 @.@ 2 mph ) slower than their Bremen @-@ made counterparts . The boats were equipped with two 45 @-@ centimetre ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) bow torpedo tubes and carried two torpedoes . They were also armed with a single 8 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun affixed to the deck .

 = = Construction = =

 The German Imperial Navy ordered its first fifteen Type UB I boats on 15 October 1914 . Eight boats — numbered UB @-@ 1 to UB @-@ 8 — were ordered from Germaniawerft of Kiel , and seven boats — numbered UB @-@ 9 to U @-@ 15 — from AG Weser of Bremen . After two of the class , UB @-@ 1 and UB @-@ 15 , were sold in February 1915 to ally Austria @-@ Hungary ( becoming U @-@ 10 and U @-@ 11 in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy ) , the German Imperial Navy ordered UB @-@ 16 and UB @-@ 17 from Weser . A further three for Austria @-@ Hungary — U @-@ 15 , U @-@ 16 , and U @-@ 17 — had been ordered from Weser by April , bringing the total number constructed to 20 .
 UB @-@ 1 and UB @-@ 2 were laid down on 1 November 1914 at the Germaniawerft yard at Kiel . UB @-@ 1 was launched on 22 January 1915 , just 75 working days later . UB @-@ 2 's launch followed on 13 February . Among the Weser boats , UB @-@ 9 was laid down first , on 6 November 1914 , and launched on 6 February 1915 , a week ahead of UB @-@ 2 . These first three boats launched underwent trials in home waters , but most of the other members of the class were shipped via rail and underwent trials at their assembly point .
 The process of shipping the submarines by rail involved breaking the submarines down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . Type UB I boats destined for service with the Flanders Flotilla made a five @-@ day journey to Antwerp for the two- to three @-@ week assembly process . After assembly at Antwerp the boats were towed by barge to Bruges for trials . Boats selected for service in the Mediterranean were sent to the Austro @-@ Hungarian port of Pola for assembly . The total time from departure of the railcars from the shipyard to operational readiness for the boats was about six weeks .
 By July 1915 all seventeen of the German Imperial Navy Type UB Is had been completed .

 = = Service = =

 During their trials the Type UB Is were found to be too small and too slow and had a reputation for being underpowered ; one commander compared his Type UB I to a " sewing machine " . According to authors R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast in their 1931 book The German Submarine War , 1914 – 1918 , the UBs did not have enough power to chase down steamers while surfaced and lacked the endurance to spend any extended amount of time underwater , exhausting their batteries after little over an hour 's running . In @-@ service use revealed another problem : with a single propeller shaft / engine combination , if either component failed , the U @-@ boat was almost totally disabled .
 Another reported problem with the Type UB Is was the tendency to break trim after the firing of torpedoes . The boats were equipped with compensating tanks designed to flood and offset the loss of the C / 06 torpedo 's 1 @,@ 700 @-@ pound ( 770 kg ) weight , but this system did not always function properly ; as a result , when firing from periscope depth the boat could broach after firing or , if too much weight was taken on , plunge to the depths . When UB @-@ 15 torpedoed and sank Italian submarine Medusa in June 1915 , the tank failed to properly compensate , forcing the entire crew to run to the stern to offset the trim imbalance .
 Despite the problems , the " tin tadpoles " , as the Germans referred to them , were in active service from March 1915 through the end of the war , with half of the 20 boats lost during the war . Boats of the class served in three navies : the German Imperial Navy , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , and the Bulgarian Navy . In German service , they served primarily in the Flanders Flotilla , the Baltic Flotilla , and the Constantinople Flotilla .

 = = = German Imperial Navy = = =


 = = = = Flanders Flotilla = = = =

 The first Type UB I to enter service was UB @-@ 10 , which formed the nucleus of the Flanders Flotilla , on 27 March 1915 . By the end of April five more Type UB I boats had become operational . UB @-@ 10 was eventually joined in the Flanders Flotilla by UB @-@ 2 , UB @-@ 4 , UB @-@ 5 , UB @-@ 6 , UB @-@ 12 , UB @-@ 13 , UB @-@ 16 , and UB @-@ 17 ; of these , only UB @-@ 2 made the journey to Flanders by sea rather than rail .
 UB @-@ 4 departed on the first patrol from Flanders on 9 April , and was responsible for sinking the first ship sent down by the flotilla . The Type UB I boats of the Flanders Flotilla originally patrolled the area between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands , but began patrolling the English Channel after UB @-@ 6 pioneered a route past British antisubmarine nets and mines in the Straits of Dover in late June .
 Over the Type UB Is ' first year of service , UB @-@ 4 and UB @-@ 13 were both lost , and UB @-@ 2 and UB @-@ 5 were transferred to the Baltic Flotilla . In March 1917 , UB @-@ 6 ran aground in Dutch waters and was interned for the rest of the war , along with her crew . The four remaining Type UB Is in Flanders — UB @-@ 10 , UB @-@ 12 , UB @-@ 16 , UB @-@ 17 — were all converted to minelayers by 1918 , having their torpedo tubes removed and replaced with chutes to carry up to eight mines . All but UB @-@ 10 were lost in 1918 ; UB @-@ 10 , in poor repair and out of service , was scuttled in October 1918 when the Germans evacuated from Flanders .

 = = = = Baltic Flotilla = = = =

 UB @-@ 9 was initially assigned to the Baltic Flotilla , and was joined by UB @-@ 2 and UB @-@ 5 in early 1916 . All three became training boats at Kiel in 1916 , joining UB @-@ 11 in that duty . Little information is available about the Type UB I boats operating in the Baltic .

 = = = = Constantinople Flotilla = = = =

 Four of the German Imperial Navy boats — UB @-@ 3 , UB @-@ 7 , UB @-@ 8 , and UB @-@ 14 — were selected for service with the Constantinople Flotilla . All were sent to Pola for assembly and trials there as part of the Pola Flotilla before sailing on to join the Constantinople Flotilla . UB @-@ 3 disappeared en route to Constantinople in May 1915 , but the other three arrived there by mid @-@ June .
 The three Type UB I boats of the Constantinople Flotilla seem to have patrolled primarily in the Black Sea . UB @-@ 8 was transferred to the Bulgarian Navy in May 1916 , and UB @-@ 7 disappeared in the Black Sea in October 1916 , leaving UB @-@ 14 as the sole remaining German Type UB I in the flotilla ; she was surrendered at Sevastopol in November 1918 to French armies stationed there during the Russian Civil War .

 = = = Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy = = =

 UB @-@ 1 and the still incomplete UB @-@ 15 were sold to the Austria @-@ Hungary in February 1915 ; both were dismantled and shipped to Pola in May . After one cruise under the German flag , each boat was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The pair — renamed U @-@ 10 and U @-@ 11 , respectively — were joined by U @-@ 15 , U @-@ 16 , and U @-@ 17 in October . Known as the U @-@ 10 or the Okarina ( English : Ocarina ) class as a part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , the five boats operated primarily in the Adriatic in patrols off Italy and Albania . U @-@ 10 ( ex UB @-@ 1 ) hit a mine in July 1918 and was beached , but had not been repaired by the end of the war . U @-@ 16 was sunk after she torpedoed an Italian destroyer in October 1916 , and the remaining three ( and the unrepaired U @-@ 10 ) were ceded to Italy at the end of the war .

 = = = Bulgarian Navy = = =

 After UB @-@ 8 was transferred to the Bulgarian Navy in May 1916 , she was renamed Podvodnik No. 18 ( in Cyrillic : Пoдвoдник No. 18 ) . She was Bulgaria 's first submarine , and was engaged primarily in coastal defense duties off Bulgaria 's main Black Sea port of Varna . Podvodnik No. 18 survived the war and was ceded to France after the Treaty of Neuilly @-@ sur @-@ Seine .

 = = List of Type UB I submarines = =

 20 Type UB I submarines were built , 17 for the German Imperial Navy and three for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . Two of the German submarines — UB @-@ 1 and UB @-@ 15 — were sold to Austria @-@ Hungary and commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as U @-@ 10 and U @-@ 11 , respectively . Those two and a further three built by AG Weser comprised the virtually identical U @-@ 10 class for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . Another of the German submarines , UB @-@ 8 , was sold to Bulgaria in May 1916 , becoming Podvodnik No. 18 .

 = = = German Imperial Navy = = =

 SM UB @-@ 1 ( became the Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ 10 , July 1915 )
 SM UB @-@ 2
 SM UB @-@ 3
 SM UB @-@ 4
 SM UB @-@ 5
 SM UB @-@ 6
 SM UB @-@ 7
 SM UB @-@ 8 ( became the Bulgarian Podvodnik No. 18 , May 1916 )
 SM UB @-@ 9
 SM UB @-@ 10
 SM UB @-@ 11
 SM UB @-@ 12
 SM UB @-@ 13
 SM UB @-@ 14
 SM UB @-@ 15 ( became the Austro @-@ Hungarian U @-@ 11 , June 1915 )
 SM UB @-@ 16
 SM UB @-@ 17

 = = = Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy = = =

 In the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy the Type UB I boats were known as the U @-@ 10 class , which consisted of two former German Type UB I boats and three built specifically for Austria @-@ Hungary .
 SM U @-@ 10 ( the former German UB @-@ 1 )
 SM U @-@ 11 ( the former German UB @-@ 15 )
 SM U @-@ 15 ( Austria @-@ Hungary )
 SM U @-@ 16 ( Austria @-@ Hungary )
 SM U @-@ 17 ( Austria @-@ Hungary )
 In addition , four of the German Type UB Is assigned to the Pola Flotilla based at the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy 's main naval base at Pola were assigned Austro @-@ Hungarian designations .
 SM UB @-@ 3 ( as U @-@ 9 )
 SM UB @-@ 7 ( as U @-@ 7 )
 SM UB @-@ 8 ( as U @-@ 8 )
 SM UB @-@ 14 ( as U @-@ 26 )
 These four boats remained under commission in the German Imperial Navy , retained German crews and commanders , and received orders from the German flotilla commander at Pola .

 = = = Bulgarian Navy = = =

 Germany and Bulgaria negotiated the purchase of two UB I boats for the Bulgarian Navy , UB @-@ 7 and UB @-@ 8 , in 1916 . Two crews of Bulgarian sailors were sent to Kiel for training . Before the purchase could be completed , UB @-@ 7 was sunk , leaving only one boat for Bulgaria . On 25 May 1916 , UB @-@ 8 was officially transferred to Bulgaria for the remainder of the war .
 Podvodnik No. 18 ( the former German UB @-@ 8 )
 Key


 = Military history of Gibraltar during World War II =

 The military history of Gibraltar during World War II exemplifies Gibraltar 's position as a British fortress since the early 18th century and as a vital factor in British military strategy , both as a foothold on the continent of Europe , and as a bastion of British sea power . During World War II , Gibraltar served a vital role in both the Atlantic Theatre and the Mediterranean Theatre , controlling virtually all naval traffic into and out of the Mediterranean Sea from the Atlantic Ocean .
 In addition to its commanding position , Gibraltar provided a strongly defended harbour from which ships could operate in both the Atlantic and the Mediterranean . Force H , under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral James Somerville was based in Gibraltar and had the task of maintaining naval superiority and providing a strong escort for convoys to and from the besieged island of Malta . During the course of the war , Gibraltar came under aerial bombardment from Vichy French aircraft and from aircraft of the Italian Royal Air Force ( Regia Aeronautica ) based on Sardinia . Additionally , the fortress was the focus of underwater attacks by the Italian Royal Navy ( Regia Marina ) commando frogman unit ( Decima Flottiglia MAS ) and their human torpedoes . This Italian unit was based on the interned Italian ship SS Olterra in the nearby Spanish harbour of Algeciras . A number of attacks were also carried out by Spanish and Gibraltarian agents acting on behalf of the German Abwehr .
 Inside the Rock of Gibraltar itself , miles of tunnels were excavated from the limestone . Masses of rock were blasted out to build an " underground city " . In huge man @-@ made caverns , barracks , offices , and a fully equipped hospital were constructed , complete with an operating theatre and X @-@ ray equipment .
 Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of French North Africa in November 1942 , was coordinated from the " Rock " . General Dwight D. Eisenhower , who was given command of the operation , set up his headquarters in Gibraltar during the planning phases of the operation . Following the successful completion of the North African campaign and the surrender of Italy in 1943 , Gibraltar 's role shifted from a forward operating base to a rear @-@ area supply position . The harbour continued to operate dry docks and supply depots for the convoy routes through the Mediterranean until V @-@ E Day in 1945 .

 = = Prelude and evacuation = =

 World War II dramatically changed the lives of Gibraltarians . The decision to enforce mass evacuation in order to increase the strength of the Rock with more military and naval personnel meant that most Gibraltarians ( some for up to ten years ) had nowhere to call ' home ' . Only those civilians with essential jobs were allowed to stay but it gave the entire community a sense of being ' British ' by sharing in the war effort .
 In early June 1940 , about 13 @,@ 500 evacuees were shipped to Casablanca in French Morocco . However , following the capitulation of the French to the German armies later in June 1940 , the new Pro @-@ German French Vichy Government found the presence of Gibraltarian evacuees in Casablanca an embarrassment and sought opportunities for their removal . The opportunity soon arose when 15 British cargo vessels arrived under Commodore Crichton , repatriating 15 @,@ 000 French servicemen who had been rescued from Dunkirk . Once their own rescued servicemen had disembarked , the ships were interned until they agreed to take away all the evacuees . Although Crichton was unable to obtain permission to clean and restock his ships ( and contrary to British Admiralty orders which forbade the taking on of evacuees ) , when he saw the mass of civilians pouring through the dockyards , he opened up his gangways for boarding . Just beforehand , the British fleet had destroyed a number of French warships at Mers el @-@ Kebir in order to prevent them ending up in German hands . The attack , during which 1 @,@ 297 French sailors died , led to high tensions , which were evident when families were forced at bayonet point by French troops to board taking only what they could carry , leaving many possessions behind . However , when they arrived at Gibraltar , the Governor would not allow them to land , fearing that once the evacuees were back on the Rock , it would be virtually impossible to evacuate them a second time . Crowds gathered in John Mackintosh Square in the centre of Gibraltar as the news broke , speeches were made and two City Councillors accompanied by the Acting President of the Exchange and Commercial Library went to see the Governor ( Sir Clive Liddell ) to ask that the evacuees be allowed to land . After receiving instructions from London , a landing was allowed as long as the evacuees returned when other ships arrived to take them away from the Rock , and by 13 July the re @-@ evacuation back to Gibraltar had been completed .
 British conservative politician Oliver Stanley agreed to accept the evacuees in the United Kingdom , but he argued with Gibraltar over the number of people involved . The Governor , he declared , had given the number of evacuees first as 13 @,@ 000 , then as 14 @,@ 000 and finally as 16 @,@ 000 . He asked for the situation to be clarified , stressing the shortage of accommodation in Britain and insisting that only 13 @,@ 000 could be accepted , 2 @,@ 000 of whom were to be sent to the Portuguese Atlantic island of Madeira . The situation , replied General Liddell on 19 July , " is that this is a fortress liable to heavy and immediate attack and there should be no civilians here whereas there are 22 @,@ 000 . The 13 @,@ 000 was the number sent to Morocco , and more would have been sent had the situation there not altered . " In London the evacuees were placed in the hands of the Ministry of Health , and many were housed in Kensington area . Concern for them in Gibraltar mounted as the air raids against London intensified , coupled with the arrival of harrowing letters , describing the circumstances in which the evacuees were living .
 In September rumours were already circulating among the evacuees , and in Gibraltar , that the possibility of re @-@ evacuating the Gibraltarians once more was being mooted , this time the destination being Jamaica , in the West Indies . After much contention , it was decided to send a party directly from Gibraltar to the island , and 1 @,@ 093 evacuees left for Jamaica direct , on 9 October , with more following later on . However petitions followed and the demands were met , partly for strategic reasons and the lack of available shipping . The situation at the end of 1940 , therefore , was that approximately 2 @,@ 000 evacuees were in Jamaica and a lesser number in Madeira , with the bulk of around 10 @,@ 000 housed in the London area .

 = = Royal Air Force involvement : 1939 – 1941 = =

 Construction of a solid surface runway began in late 1939 and in 1940 it was proposed to extend the existing runway to a length of 1 @,@ 550 yards ( 1 @,@ 417 m ) . The land reclamation commenced towards the end of 1941 along with the construction of an RAF camp at the " North Front " , now RAF Gibraltar . The RAF dispatched their next squadron to Gibraltar at this time and it was in September 1939 that war with Germany was declared and the strong possibility of German submarines concentrating in the Strait of Gibraltar and using Spanish port facilities , loomed large in Admiralty thinking . So at 09 : 00 ( UTC ) on the 9 September 1939 , No. 202 Squadron RAF was ordered to Gibraltar , loaded to the gunwales with equipment .
 On 25 September 1939 , No 200 ( Coastal ) Group was formed as a subordinate formation to HQ RAF Mediterranean in control of No 202 Sqn . The Group 's function was the control of Royal Air Force units operating from Gibraltar . In late 1940 the Group was transferred to Coastal Command . Later a combined HQ was formed which commenced operations in early 1942 .

 = = Vichy French attacks : 1940 = =

 On 18 July 1940 , after the attack on the French Fleet at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir by the British , the Vichy government authorized a bombing raid of Gibraltar as a response . Little damage was reported to have been done .
 On Tuesday , 24 September , the Italian Stefani news agency reported : " As a reprisal for the bombardment of Dakar yesterday morning , one @-@ hundred @-@ and @-@ twenty French aircraft based in Morocco attacked Gibraltar . " On the same day , the United Press Agency reported : " The French government has issued an official denial of reports , according to which French aircraft were said to have attacked Gibraltar . Up until now , no reprisals have been undertaken . " But the United Press report ended on an ominous note with : " French reprisals are imminent . "
 Again , on the same day , the Vichy French government issued orders for the naval base and city of Gibraltar to be bombarded . As a result , six bomber squadrons of the Vichy French Air Force ( Armée de l 'Air de Vichy ) and four squadrons of the Vichy French Navy ( Marine nationale de Vichy ) were employed in the operation . The 64 bombers flew from bases in Oran , Tafaroui ( in Algeria ) , Meknes , Mediouna , and Port Lyautey ( in Morocco ) . The French action was approved by both the German Armistice Commission and the Italian Armistice Commission .
 No British aircraft were encountered and much damage was done in the area south of the fortress . The South Mole and a large ship in the harbour were heavily damaged . In the northern part of Gibraltar , fires broke out .
 On 25 September , the French returned with a larger force of eighty @-@ three bombers to cause additional damage to the naval base and harbour installations . Again , aircraft of the British Royal Air Force made no appearance . However , the French crews did report encountering heavy anti @-@ aircraft fire . One LeO 451 bomber was lost and 13 other aircraft were lightly damaged during the two days of bombing attacks . The British armed trawler HMT Stella Sirius was sunk by bombs .
 The air attack on 25 September was the last by Vichy forces on Gibraltar .

 = = Operation Felix : 1940 – 1941 = =

 The Rock came through the war relatively unscathed but , given its strategic importance , Germany made plans to capture Gibraltar . Codenamed " Felix " , the plan which was signed by Adolf Hitler himself was formulated at the highest level of command . With or without permission , Germany would take entry through Spain and attack Gibraltar driving the British out of the Western Mediterranean . The Strait would be effectively closed to the Allies once Gibraltar was in German hands , forcing Asia @-@ bound Allied shipping to steam all the way around Africa rather than to proceed to the east via the shorter route through the Mediterranean and the Suez Canal . The Rock was to be heavily dive bombed by planes leaving France but landing afterward at Spanish air bases . To deny a possible Spanish capture of the base , the German planners decided that the final attack to seize Gibraltar was to be made by German troops alone .
 Diplomatic failure at the highest levels of government prevented the operation from occurring at the beginning of 1941 which had been drawn up in detail by the Wehrmacht in the summer and autumn of 1940 .
 General Ludwig Kübler 's XLIX Corps would conduct the actual attack on the Rock . The assault forces would comprise the Infantry Regiment Großdeutschland , the 98th Regiment of the 1st Mountain Division , 26 medium and heavy artillery battalions , three observation battalions , three engineer battalions , two smoke battalions , a detachment of 150 Brandenburgers , and up to 150 miniature remote controlled demolition vehicles ( Goliaths ) , packed with high explosives .
 As part of a combined @-@ force operation , the German Air Force ( Luftwaffe ) would contribute Ju 88As , Stukas , Messerschmitts , three light AA battalions , and three heavy AA battalions . Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine would cooperate by using U @-@ boats to interfere with British naval movement and emplacing coastal batteries to further discourage the Royal Navy .
 On 10 March 1941 , with Operation Barbarossa looming , Felix was amended to Operation Felix @-@ Heinrich , whereby German troops would be withdrawn from the USSR to capture Gibraltar . As a result of Spanish dictator Francisco Franco 's intransigence , the operation was postponed , modified , and ultimately abandoned .

 = = Italian bombing of Gibraltar = =

 From Sardinia , Italian Piaggio P.108 bombers attacked Gibraltar several times , mainly in 1942 . The last raids on Gibraltar were done during the 1943 Allied landing in Algeria , when those bombers hit successfully even the Oran port .
 The only unit of the Regia Aeronautica ( Royal Air Force ) ever to fly the Piaggio P.108 was the " 274th Long @-@ Range Bombardment Squadron " . This unit was formed in May 1941 around the first machines that came off the assembly lines . The training of the crews lasted far longer than anticipated and only in June 1942 the 274th became operational . The most spectacular raids with the P. 108 bombers were flown in October 1942 when several night attacks against Gibraltar were undertaken from Sardinia .
 After the armistice of Cassibile ( 8 September ) , the German @-@ allied Italian Social Republic launched at least two raids on Gibraltar : one on the night of 4 – 5 June 1944 with ten SM.79bis aircraft and another on 6 June with nine aircraft . Both sorties were undertaken by the Gruppo Aerosiluranti " Buscaglia – Faggioni " .

 = = Italian frogmen raids 1940 – 1943 = =

 Known as the " Floating Trojan Horse of Gibraltar " , Decima Flottiglia MAS , an Italian commando frogman unit created during the Fascist government , engaged in numerous attacks against the harbour at Gibraltar .
 Gibraltar was a very tempting target for the Italians , who saw it as a refuge for British warships and allied merchant shipping . The Italian frogmen originally used a Spanish villa ( Villa Carmela ) located two miles ( 3 km ) from Gibraltar owned by an Italian officer who had married a Spanish woman named Conchita Ramognino . Their base was shifted later to the Italian tanker SS Olterra , interned in Algeciras .

 = = Abwehr saboteurs from Spain = =

 Lesser known than the Italian actions were the sabotage operations and limpet @-@ mine attacks carried out by Spanish and Gibraltarian agents recruited in the Campo de Gibraltar by the Germans . The Abwehr contacted a Spanish staff officer from Campo de Gibraltar , Lieutenant Colonel Eleuterio Sánchez Rubio , a Spanish officer , member of the Falange and coordinator of the intelligence operations in the Campo , to establish a network of saboteurs with access to Gibraltar . Sánchez Rubio designated Emilio Plazas Tejera , also a member of Falange , as operations chief of the organisation . Most of the recruits for the sabotage operations were Spaniards from the Campo . A combination of financial reward , ideological commitment and some threats and intimidation were used to gather a significant number of agents . According to the British intelligence , there were at least 183 Spaniards and Gibraltarians involved in the espionage and sabotage operations against Gibraltar .
 Sabotage operations were ordered from Berlin in the late autumn of 1940 , but actual work did not start until early 1941 . The first operations were unsuccessful . A first attempt to smuggle a bomb into Gibraltar was aborted , as the timing device was faulty . In February there was a large explosion in the North Tunnel , and in April a bomb blew up near the airfield . In June 1941 , however , the British intelligence foiled a new attempt , by a German agent , to attach a mine alongside an Allied cargo ship . Another attempt failed when Plazas placed a bomb inside an ammunition store but was not able to bring the explosive . It was not until 1942 that the operations begun to succeed . In January 1942 , two Spanish agents manage to destroy two aircraft at the North Front landing strip .
 Financed , trained and equipped by the Germans , the saboteurs sank the armed trawler HMT Erin , and destroyed the auxiliary minesweeper HMT Honju , which resulted in the deaths of six British seamen on 18 January 1942 . Plazas was assisted by the Spanish naval commander of Puente Mayorga , Manuel Romero Hume , who allowed him to beach a rowboat there . The British intelligence was able however to counteract the sabotage operations . In March 1942 , a Gibraltarian , José Key , one of the most prominent agents working for the Germans , responsible for the collection of information on military movements for the Abwehr was arrested and executed in Wandsworth Prison in late 1942 . By September 1942 , Plazas , whose activities were closely monitored by the British at that time , resigned and left Carlos Calvo , his second in command , in charge of the operations . In late 1942 , the German headquarters in Berlin ordered the sabotage operations being expanded . In early 1943 , the arrival of an experienced head of Abwehr operations in Spain improved the outreach of the operations .
 In March 1943 an ammunition dump was blown up by Calvo 's agents . The British , growing suspicious of some of the saboteurs , banned them from entering Gibraltar . This forced the Abwehr to ask Calvo for new personnel . A Spaniard working on the Rock , José Martín Muñoz , was responsible for the explosion and fire at a large fuel tank at Coaling Island on 30 June 1943 ; this mission , however , would be the first and the last for Muñoz , because he was cornered and arrested by British authorities in August , when he tried to smuggle a bomb into a weapons magazine inside Ragged Staff Cave . After being sentenced to death , he was hanged on 11 January 1944 in Gibraltar by British executioner Albert Pierrepoint . A member of an unrelated Abwehr sabotage network , Luis López Cordón @-@ Cuenca ( also arrested in 1943 ) was executed by Pierrepoint on the same day . Calvo himself was put under arrest by the Spanish police and neutralized . He would be a free man again in December , when he rejoined the Abwehr in Madrid , under direct orders of Wolfgang Blaum , aka Baumann , head of the sabotage section in Spain . After a Falangist attempt against the life of pro @-@ allied General José Enrique Varela , perpetrated by Sánchez Rubio network 's agent Juan José Domínguez and a meeting between Anthony Eden and the Spanish ambassador at London , Jacobo Fitz @-@ James Stuart , Abwehr activities around Gibraltar came to an end .

 = = Operation Tracer : 1941 – 1942 = =

 Operation Tracer was a top @-@ secret British stay @-@ behind spying mission that was only to be implemented if Gibraltar was captured by the Axis Powers . Six men were to be sealed in a cave and left with only enough supplies for a year . The volunteers — two doctors , three signalmen and their leader — would run an observation post with one 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) by 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) slit looking over the harbour and a concealed outdoor terrace over the Mediterranean . The team would then wire back all shipping movements to the British Admiralty .
 They were told there would be no way out and anyone who died within the chamber would have to be embalmed and cemented into the brick floor . Only if Germany was defeated within their first year would they be released .
 As the threat of invasion was clearly felt in late 1941 , an idea for a series of secret observation posts ( first in Gibraltar and later in other places like Malta and Aden ) was put together under Operation Tracer .
 Work in Gibraltar began immediately under Commander Geoffrey Birley and his chief engineer Colonel Fordham . The site chosen at Lord Airey 's Battery on the southern tip of the Rock already had an existing tunnelling scheme for a shelter . Extensive trials of the equipment began in January 1942 under the eye of MI6 radio expert Colonel Richard Gambier @-@ Parry . Much thought was also given to the type of men needed for such a strange and demanding task . A member of Scott ’ s ill @-@ fated expedition to the Antarctic , George Murray Levick was called up as Surgeon @-@ Commander to advise on survival techniques . There were practical matters such as diet , exercise , sanitation , and clothing to consider as well as vital " psychology of the personnel " . The full team was in place by the end of summer 1942 and their cavern fully equipped and ready for occupation . A comprehensive manual was prepared on all aspects of the operation and it was considered that similar secret lookout posts should be prepared throughout the world in the event of future wars . However , Operation Tracer was never needed , as Adolf Hitler turned his attention away from Gibraltar and towards the Eastern Front .
 The operation had been clouded in mystery until the discovery of papers at the Public Record Office in Kew UK . Previously in the 1960s , details of the story were told to a journalist by his intelligence service contacts and he wrote these up as " Operation Monkey " , yet facts were very sparse .
 In 1997 " Stay Behind Cave " ( as it was nicknamed ) was discovered in Gibraltar by the Gibraltar Caving Group , but no account was ever obtained from anyone associated with the mission . The discovery came about when the group encountered a strong gust of wind in a tunnel . Further searching led them to break through a wall into chambers which had never been used and had remained sealed for over 50 years .
 In November 2006 Jim Crone and Sergeant Major Pete Jackson , senior tunnel guide with the Royal Gibraltar Regiment , met possibly the only member of Operation Tracer still alive when they travelled to meet Dr. W. A. Bruce Cooper at his home in England . Cooper , 92 at the time , provided an opportunity to shed light on the operation with his direct involvement in the mission as a Surgeon @-@ Lieutenant in the Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve ( RNVR ) . He recalled stories about his colleagues , his training , and his feelings about the task .

 = = Mediterranean U @-@ boat Campaign : 1941 – 1944 = =

 The Mediterranean U @-@ boat Campaign lasted approximately from 21 September 1941 to May 1944 . The Kriegsmarine tried to isolate Gibraltar , Malta , and Suez and disrupt Britain 's trade routes . More than sixty U @-@ boats were sent to interdict Allied shipping in the Mediterranean Sea . Many of these U @-@ boats were themselves attacked negotiating the Strait of Gibraltar controlled by Britain . Nine U @-@ boats were sunk while attempting passage and ten more were damaged .

 = = North African Campaign : 1942 = =

 Plans for the Allied counter offensive after the attack on Pearl Harbor were ongoing by mid @-@ 1942 . An invasion of Europe in 1943 would be unworkable , but the allies could attack the " soft underbelly of Europe " through the Mediterranean , as Prime Minister Winston Churchill put it . Devised by President Franklin Roosevelt and Churchill and code named Operation Torch , the plan was to occupy French North Africa : Morocco , Algeria , and Tunisia . From these French colonies , attacks could be launched that would drive Italy out of the war .
 In July 1942 , Lieutenant General Dwight D. Eisenhower was appointed Allied Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Operation Torch . Churchill placed Gibraltar under the command of General Eisenhower as the temporary headquarters for this , the first large @-@ scale Anglo @-@ American operation of the war . He arrived in Gibraltar on 5 November 1942 to take over , not just command of Operation Torch itself , but also military command of Gibraltar .
 General Eisenhower stayed at The Convent , the official Governor 's residence , but his operational headquarters were in a small chamber in a tunnel in the heart of the Rock . In his memoirs General Eisenhower wrote :
 The subterranean passages under the Rock provided the sole available office space , and in them was located the signal equipment by which we expected to keep in touch with the commanders of the three assault forces . The eternal darkness of the tunnels was here and there partially pierced by feeble electric bulbs . Damp , cold air in block @-@ long passages was heavy with stagnation and did not noticeably respond to the clattering efforts of electric fans . Through the arched ceilings came a constant drip , drip , drip of surface water that faithfully but drearily ticked off the seconds of the interminable , almost unendurable , wait which always occurs between completion of a military plan and the moment action begins .
 One hundred thousand soldiers on the high seas in a multitude of transports converged on Gibraltar . More than 400 aircraft of all types were crammed into the dispersal areas around the Gibraltar runway . Fighters had been shipped in crates and assembled on the airfield . Every available area of storage was taken up with ammunition , fuel , and other essential supplies . 168 American pilots were housed in the RAF messes at North Front .
 On 8 November 1942 , 466 aircraft from Gibraltar landed on captured North African airfields .
 From their headquarters in Gibraltar , General Eisenhower and Admiral Sir Andrew Browne Cunningham directed Operation Torch , the first major combined combat operation during World War II involving American and British forces .

 = = = War tunnels = = =

 Given that Gibraltar was a small town with only a few defences protecting it , the solution was to build a massive series of tunnels and chambers inside the natural protection of the Rock of Gibraltar . This " town " inside the Rock contained its own power station , water supply , and hospital . Some soldiers posted here would not see the light of day for months on end . Two Canadian engineer companies , the only soldiers with diamond @-@ tipped drills and 5 British engineer companies , added some 30 miles ( 48 km ) of such tunnels , a feat thought impossible at the time . That was enough to hold all 30 @,@ 000 troops on the rock . Today , the rock has more underground tunnels than roads .

 = = Death of Władysław Sikorski : 1943 = =

 On 4 July 1943 , a Liberator bomber from RAF Transport Command took off from Gibraltar for England . On board was General Władysław Sikorski , Prime Minister of Poland 's London @-@ based government in exile and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of its armed forces , returning from visiting Polish troops in the Middle East .
 The aircraft climbed normally from the runway , levelled off to gather speed but then suddenly lost height and crashed into the harbour . The 62 @-@ year @-@ old general died , along with 15 others . The sole survivor was the Czech @-@ born pilot , Eduard Prchal , who was rescued by an RAF launch . The bodies of five passengers and crew , including Sikorski 's daughter , were never found .
 The coffins of General Sikorski and his Chief @-@ of @-@ Staff , General Kilimecki , were draped in the Polish National Flag and lay in state in the Cathedral of St. Mary the Crowned . After a Requiem Mass , the bodies were carried in procession to the H.M. Dockyard with full Military Honours to be shipped to London in anticipation that General Sikorski 's remains would one day be returned to a liberated Poland . The route to the dockyard was lined by British troops and the coffins carried and escorted by Polish Servicemen .

 = = = Investigation = = =

 In 1943 a British Court of Inquiry investigated the crash of Sikorski 's Liberator II AL523 , but was unable to determine the probable cause , finding only that it was an accident and the " aircraft became uncontrollable for reasons which cannot be established " . A popular theory was insufficient technical maintenance leading to jamming aircraft controls . Despite this finding , the political context of the event , coupled with a variety of curious circumstances , immediately gave rise to speculation that Sikorski 's death had been no accident , and may in fact have been the direct result of a Soviet , British or even Polish conspiracy .

 = = Aftermath = =

 The surrender of Italy in September 1943 lifted any possible objections to the return of the evacuees to the Rock . As a result , a Resettlement Board was established in November , and at a meeting of the Board on 8 February 1944 repatriation priorities were finally agreed . On 6 April 1944 the first group of 1 @,@ 367 repatriates arrived on the Rock directly from the United Kingdom and on 28 May , the first repatriation party left Madeira , and by the end of 1944 only 520 non @-@ priority evacuees remained on the island .
 In London , home @-@ comers were making claims on the evacuees ’ wartime accommodation and 500 Gibraltarians were re @-@ evacuated to Scotland and 3 @,@ 000 to camps in Northern Ireland . Although the Governor , Lt. General Sir Noel Mason @-@ MacFarlane , fought valiantly on behalf of the evacuees and did not accept the lack of accommodation as a sufficient reason for the delays . As late as 1947 there were still 2 @,@ 000 in Northern Irish camps . The last of the evacuees did not see the Rock again until 1951 .

 = = See Also = =

 Military history of the British Commonwealth in the Second World War


 = Nerva =

 Nerva ( Latin : Marcus Cocceius Nerva Caesar Augustus ; 8 November , 30 AD – 27 January , 98 AD ) was Roman Emperor from 96 to 98 . Nerva became Emperor at the age of sixty @-@ five , after a lifetime of imperial service under Nero and the rulers of the Flavian dynasty . Under Nero , he was a member of the imperial entourage and played a vital part in exposing the Pisonian conspiracy of 65 . Later , as a loyalist to the Flavians , he attained consulships in 71 and 90 during the reigns of Vespasian and Domitian respectively .
 On 18 September 96 , Domitian was assassinated in a palace conspiracy involving members of the Praetorian Guard and several of his freedmen . On the same day , Nerva was declared emperor by the Roman Senate . This was the first time the Senate elected a Roman Emperor . As the new ruler of the Roman Empire , he vowed to restore liberties which had been curtailed during the autocratic government of Domitian .
 Nerva 's brief reign was marred by financial difficulties and his inability to assert his authority over the Roman army . A revolt by the Praetorian Guard in October 97 essentially forced him to adopt an heir . After some deliberation Nerva adopted Trajan , a young and popular general , as his successor . After barely fifteen months in office , Nerva died of natural causes on 27 January 98 . Upon his death he was succeeded and deified by Trajan .
 Although much of his life remains obscure , Nerva was considered a wise and moderate emperor by ancient historians . Nerva 's greatest success was his ability to ensure a peaceful transition of power after his death , thus founding the Nerva – Antonine dynasty .

 = = Early career = =


 = = = Family = = =

 Marcus Cocceius Nerva was born in the village of Narni , 50 kilometers north of Rome , to the family of Marcus Cocceius Nerva , Suffect Consul in 40 , and Sergia Plautilla . Ancient sources report the date as either 30 or 35 . He had at least one attested sister , named Cocceia , who married Lucius Salvius Titianus Otho , the brother of the future Emperor Otho .
 Like Vespasian , the founder of the Flavian dynasty , Nerva was a member of the Italian nobility rather than one of the elite of Rome . Nevertheless , the Cocceii were among the most esteemed and prominent political families of the late Republic and early Empire , attaining consulships in each successive generation . The direct ancestors of Nerva on his father 's side , all named Marcus Cocceius Nerva , were associated with imperial circles since the time of Emperor Augustus ( 27 BC – AD 14 ) .
 His great @-@ grandfather was Consul in 36 BC ( in replacement , and abdicated ) , and Governor of Asia in the same year . His grandfather became Consul Suffect in July of either 21 or 22 , and was known as a personal friend of Emperor Tiberius ( AD 14 – 37 ) , accompanying the emperor during his voluntary seclusion on Capri from 23 onwards , dying in 33 . Nerva 's father , finally , attained the consulship in 40 under emperor Caligula ( 37 – 41 ) . The Cocceii were connected with the Julio @-@ Claudian dynasty through the marriage of Sergia Plautilla 's brother Octavius Laenas , and Rubellia Bassa , the great @-@ granddaughter of Tiberius .

 = = = Imperial service = = =

 Not much of Nerva 's early life or career is recorded , but it appears he did not pursue the usual administrative or military career . He was praetor @-@ elect in the year 65 and , like his ancestors , moved in imperial circles as a skilled diplomat and strategist . As an advisor to Emperor Nero , he successfully helped detect and expose the Pisonian conspiracy of 65 . Exactly what his contribution to the investigation was is not known but his services must have been considerable , since they earned him rewards equal to those of Nero 's guard prefect Tigellinus . He received triumphal honors — which was usually reserved for military victories — and the right to have his statues placed throughout the palace .
 According to the contemporary poet Martial , Nero also held Nerva 's literary abilities in high esteem , hailing him as the " Tibullus of our time " . Another prominent member of Nero 's entourage was Vespasian , an old and respected general who had celebrated military triumphs during the 40s . It appears Vespasian befriended Nerva during his time as an imperial advisor , and may have asked him to watch over Vespasian 's youngest son Domitian when Vespasian departed for the Jewish war in 67 .
 The suicide of Nero on 9 June 68 brought the Julio @-@ Claudian dynasty to an end , leading to the chaotic Year of the Four Emperors , which saw the successive rise and fall of the emperors Galba , Otho and Vitellius , until the accession of Vespasian on 21 December 69 . Virtually nothing is known of Nerva 's whereabouts during 69 , but despite the fact that Otho was his brother @-@ in @-@ law , he appears to have been one of the earliest and strongest supporters of the Flavians .
 For services unknown , he was rewarded with a consulship early in Vespasian 's reign in 71 . This was a remarkable honour , not only because he held this office early under the new regime , but also because it was an ordinary consulship ( instead of a less prestigious suffect consulship ) , making him one of the few non @-@ Flavians to be honoured in this way under Vespasian . After 71 Nerva again disappears from historical record , presumably continuing his career as an inconspicuous advisor under Vespasian ( 69 – 79 ) and his sons Titus ( 79 – 81 ) and Domitian ( 81 – 96 ) .
 He re @-@ emerges during the revolt of Saturninus in 89 . On 1 January , 89 , the governor of Germania Superior , Lucius Antonius Saturninus , and his two legions at Mainz , Legio XIV Gemina and Legio XXI Rapax , revolted against the Roman Empire with the aid of a tribe of the Chatti . The governor of Germania Inferior , Lappius Maximus , moved to the region at once , assisted by the procurator of Rhaetia , Titus Flavius Norbanus . Within twenty @-@ four days the rebellion was crushed , and its leaders at Mainz savagely punished . The mutinous legions were sent to the front of Illyricum , while those who had assisted in their defeat were duly rewarded .
 Domitian opened the year following the revolt by sharing the consulship with Nerva . Again , the honour suggested Nerva had played a part in uncovering the conspiracy , perhaps in a fashion similar to what he did during the Pisonian conspiracy under Nero . Alternatively , Domitian may have selected Nerva as his colleague to emphasise the stability and status @-@ quo of the regime . The revolt had been suppressed , and the Empire could return to order .

 = = Emperor = =


 = = = Accession = = =

 On 18 September , 96 , Domitian was assassinated in a palace conspiracy organised by court officials . The Fasti Ostienses , the Ostian Calendar , records that the same day the Senate proclaimed Marcus Cocceius Nerva emperor . Despite his political experience , this was a remarkable choice . Nerva was old and childless , and had spent much of his career out of the public light , prompting both ancient and modern authors to speculate on his involvement in Domitian 's assassination .
 According to Cassius Dio , the conspirators approached Nerva as a potential successor prior to the assassination , which indicates that he was at least aware of the plot . Suetonius by contrast does not mention Nerva , but he may have omitted his role out of tactfulness . Considering the works of Suetonius were published under Nerva 's direct descendants Trajan and Hadrian , it would have been less than sensitive of him to suggest the dynasty owed its accession to murder . On the other hand , Nerva lacked widespread support in the Empire , and as a known Flavian loyalist his track record would not have recommended him to the conspirators . The precise facts have been obscured by history , but modern historians believe Nerva was proclaimed Emperor solely on the initiative of the Senate , within hours after the news of the assassination broke .
 Although he appeared to be an unlikely candidate on account of his age and weak health , Nerva was considered a safe choice precisely because he was old and childless . Furthermore , he had close connections with the Flavian dynasty and commanded the respect of a substantial part of the Senate . Nerva had seen the anarchy which had resulted from the death of Nero ; he knew that to hesitate even for a few hours could lead to violent civil conflict . Rather than decline the invitation and risk revolts , he accepted . The decision may have been hasty so as to avoid civil war , but neither the Senate nor Nerva appears to have been involved in the conspiracy against Domitian .
 Following the accession of Nerva as emperor , the Senate passed damnatio memoriae on Domitian : his coins and statues were melted , his arches were torn down and his name was erased from all public records . In many instances , existing portraits of Domitian , such as those found on the Cancelleria Reliefs , were simply recarved to fit the likeness of Nerva . This allowed quick production of new images and recycling of previous material . In addition , the vast palace which Domitian had erected on the Palatine Hill , known as the Flavian Palace , was renamed the " House of the People " , and Nerva himself took up residence in Vespasian 's former villa in the Gardens of Sallust .

 = = = Administration = = =

 The change of government was welcome particularly to the senators , who had been harshly persecuted during Domitian 's reign . As an immediate gesture of goodwill towards his supporters , Nerva publicly swore that no senators would be put to death as long as he remained in office . He called an end to trials based on treason , released those who had been imprisoned under these charges , and granted amnesty to many who had been exiled .
 All properties which had been confiscated by Domitian were returned to their respective families . Nerva also sought to involve the Senate in his government , but this was not entirely successful . He continued to rely largely on friends and advisors that were known and trusted , and by maintaining friendly relations with the pro @-@ Domitianic faction of the Senate , he incurred hostility which may have been the cause for at least one conspiracy against his life .
 Having been proclaimed emperor solely on the initiative of the Senate , Nerva had to introduce a number of measures to gain support among the Roman populace . As was custom by this time , a change of emperor was expected to bring with it a generous payment of gifts and money to the people and the army . Accordingly , a congiarium of 75 denarii per head was bestowed upon the citizens , while the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard received a donativum which may have amounted to as much as 5000 denarii per person . This was followed by a string of economic reforms intended to alleviate the burden of taxation from the most needy Romans .
 To the poorest , Nerva granted allotments of land worth up to 60 million sesterces . He exempted parents and their children from a 5 % inheritance tax , and he made loans to Italian landowners on the condition that they pay interest of 5 % to their municipality to support the children of needy families ; alimentary schemes which were later expanded by Trajan , Antoninus Pius , and Marcus Aurelius . Furthermore , numerous taxes were remitted and privileges granted to Roman provinces . Namely , he probably abolished the Fiscus Iudaicus , the additional tax which all Jews throughout the Empire had to pay : some of his coins bear the legend FISCI IUDAICI CALUMNIA SUBLATA ( abolition of malicious prosecution regarding the Jewish tax ) .
 Before long , Nerva 's expenses strained the economy of Rome and , although perhaps not ruinous to the extent once suggested by Syme , necessitated the formation of a special commission of economy to drastically reduce expenditures . The most superfluous religious sacrifices , games and horse races were abolished , while new income was generated from Domitian 's former possessions , including the auctioning of ships , estates , and even furniture . Large amounts of money were obtained from Domitian 's silver and gold statues , and Nerva forbade that similar images be made in his honor .
 Because he reigned only briefly , Nerva 's public works were few , instead completing projects which had been initiated under Flavian rule . This included extensive repairs to the Roman road system and the expansion of the aqueducts . The latter program was headed by the former consul Sextus Julius Frontinus , who helped to put an end to abuses and later published a significant work on Rome 's water supply , De Aquis Urbis Romae . The only major landmarks constructed under Nerva were a granary , known as the Horrea Nervae , and a small Imperial Forum begun by Domitian , which linked the Forum of Augustus to the Temple of Peace . Little remains , partly because the Via dei Fori Imperiali cuts across it .

 = = = Crisis of succession = = =

 Despite Nerva 's measures to remain popular with the Senate and the Roman people , support for Domitian remained strong in the army , which had called for his deification immediately after the assassination . In an attempt to appease the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard , Nerva had dismissed their prefect Titus Petronius Secundus — one of the chief conspirators against Domitian — and replaced him with a former commander , Casperius Aelianus .
 Likewise , the generous donativum bestowed upon the soldiers following his accession was expected to swiftly silence any protests against the violent regime change . The Praetorians considered these measures insufficient , however , and demanded the execution of Domitian 's assassins , which Nerva refused . Continued dissatisfaction with this state of affairs would ultimately lead to the gravest crisis of Nerva 's reign .
 While the swift transfer of power following Domitian 's death had prevented a civil war from erupting , Nerva 's position as an emperor soon proved too vulnerable , and his benign nature turned into a reluctance to assert his authority . Upon his accession , he had ordered a halt to treason trials , but at the same time allowed the prosecution of informers by the Senate to continue . This measure led to chaos , as everyone acted in his own interests while trying to settle scores with personal enemies , leading the consul Fronto to famously remark that Domitian 's tyranny was ultimately preferable to Nerva 's anarchy . Early in 97 , a conspiracy led by the senator Gaius Calpurnius Piso Crassus Frugi Licinianus failed , but once again Nerva refused to put the conspirators to death , much to the disapproval of the Senate .
 The situation was further aggravated by the absence of a clear successor , made more pressing because of Nerva 's old age and sickness . He had no natural children of his own and only distant relatives , who were unsuited for political office . A successor would have to be chosen from among the governors or generals in the Empire and it appears that , by 97 , Nerva was considering to adopt Marcus Cornelius Nigrinus Curiatius Maternus , the powerful governor of Syria . This was covertly opposed by those who supported the more popular military commander Marcus Ulpius Traianus , commonly known as Trajan , a general of the armies at the German frontier .
 In October 97 these tensions came to a head when the Praetorian Guard , led by Casperius Aelianus , laid siege to the Imperial Palace and took Nerva hostage . He was forced to submit to their demands , agreeing to hand over those responsible for Domitian 's death and even giving a speech thanking the rebellious Praetorians . Titus Petronius Secundus and Parthenius , Domitian 's former chamberlain , were sought out and killed . Nerva was unharmed in this assault , but his authority was damaged beyond repair .
 He realized that his position was no longer tenable without the support of an heir who had the approval of both the army and the people . Shortly thereafter , he announced the adoption of Trajan as his successor , and with this decision all but abdicated . Trajan was formally bestowed with the title of Caesar and shared the consulship with Nerva in 98 :
 Contrary to the view here popularized by Cassius Dio , however , Nerva had in fact little choice with regard to his successor . Faced with a major crisis , he desperately needed the support of a man who could restore his damaged reputation . The only candidate with sufficient military experience , consular ancestry , and connections was Trajan . Likewise , Edward Gibbon 's assertion that Nerva hereby established a tradition of succession through adoption among the Five Good Emperors has found little support among modern historians .

 = = Death and legacy = =

 On 1 January , 98 , at the start of his fourth consulship , Nerva suffered a stroke during a private audience . Shortly thereafter he was struck by a fever and died at his villa in the Gardens of Sallust , on 28 January . He was deified by the Senate , and his ashes were laid to rest in the Mausoleum of Augustus .
 Nerva was succeeded without incident by his adopted son Trajan , who was greeted by the Roman populace with much enthusiasm . According to Pliny the Younger , Trajan dedicated a temple in honour of Nerva , yet no trace of it has ever been found ; nor was a commemorative series of coins for the Deified Nerva issued until ten years after his death . According to Cassius Dio , however , the Guard prefect responsible for the mutiny against Nerva , Casperius Aelianus , was ' dismissed ' upon Trajan 's accession .
 Due to the lack of written sources on this period , much of Nerva 's life has remained obscure . The most substantial surviving account of the reign of Nerva was written by the 3rd @-@ century historian Cassius Dio . His Roman History , which spans nearly a millennium , from the arrival of Aeneas in Italy until the year 229 , was composed more than one hundred years after Nerva had died . Further details are added by an abridged biography from the Epitome de Caesaribus , a work alleged to have been authored by the 4th @-@ century historian Aurelius Victor .
 A more comprehensive text , presumed to describe the life of Nerva in closer detail , is the Histories , by the contemporary historian Tacitus . The Histories is an account of the history of Rome covering three decades from the suicide of emperor Nero in 69 until the death of Domitian in 96 . Unfortunately , a substantial part of the work has been lost , with only the first five books covering the Year of the Four Emperors remaining . In the introduction to his biography of Gnaeus Julius Agricola however , Tacitus speaks highly of Nerva , describing his reign as " the dawn of a most happy age , [ when ] Nerva Caesar blended things once irreconcilable , sovereignty and freedom " .
 The surviving histories speak equally positively of Nerva 's brief reign , although none offer a substantial commentary on his policies . Both Cassius Dio and Aurelius Victor emphasize his wisdom and moderation , with Dio commending his decision to adopt Trajan as his heir . These views were later popularized by the 18th @-@ century historian Edward Gibbon in his History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire . Gibbon considered Nerva the first of the Five Good Emperors , five successive rulers under whom the Roman Empire " was governed by absolute power , under the guidance of wisdom and virtue " from 96 until 180 . Nevertheless , even Gibbon notes that , compared to his successors , Nerva may have lacked the necessary qualifications for a successful reign :
 Modern history has expanded upon this sentiment , characterizing Nerva as a well @-@ intentioned but weak and ineffectual ruler . The Roman Senate enjoyed renewed liberties under his rule , but Nerva 's mismanagement of the state finances and lack of authority over the army ultimately brought Rome near the edge of a significant crisis . The mutiny led by Casperius Aelianus was never intended as a coup , but a calculated attempt to put pressure on the emperor . The adoption of Trajan expanded his power base with a respected , reliable general as his successor . Murison concludes that Nerva 's real talents were in fact ill @-@ suited to the emperorship :
 His place in Roman history is therefore summarized as a necessary , if tumultuous stop @-@ gap before the Trajanic @-@ Antonine dynasties . It is a fact of irony that even the only major public work completed during his reign , the Forum of Nerva , ultimately became known as the Forum Transitorium , or transitional forum .
 Two modern statues which commemorate Nerva can be found in towns associated with him . There is an equestrian statue in Gloucester , England , a town which was founded in his honour . It is at the entrance to Southgate Street . There is also a statue at his alleged birthplace , Narni in Italy , at Cocceio Nerva street .

 = = Nerva – Antonine family tree = =


 = = In popular culture = =

 Nerva was played by Norman Wooland in the 1951 film Quo Vadis .
 He was also played by Giuliano Gemma in the 1964 film Revolt of the Praetorians .

 = = = Secondary material = = =

 Narnia web links , International links ' , International links from Narnia.it web site
 Wend , David ( 1998 ) . " Nerva ( 96 – 98 A.D. ) " . De Imperatoribus Romanis . Retrieved 2007 @-@ 08 @-@ 11 .
 Pelham , Henry Francis ( 1911 ) . " Nerva , Marcus Cocceius " . In Chisholm , Hugh . Encyclopædia Britannica 19 ( 11th ed . ) . Cambridge University Press. pp. 393 – 394 .

 = The Hustler ( film ) =

 The Hustler is a 1961 American drama film directed by Robert Rossen from Walter Tevis 's 1959 novel of the same name , adapted for the screen by Rossen and Sidney Carroll . It tells the story of small @-@ time pool hustler " Fast Eddie " Felson and his desire to break into the " major league " of professional hustling and high @-@ stakes wagering by high @-@ rollers that follows it . He throws his raw talent and ambition up against the best player in the country ; seeking to best the legendary pool player " Minnesota Fats . " After initially losing to Fats and getting involved with unscrupulous manager Bert Gordon , Eddie returns to try again , but only after paying a terrible personal price .
 The film was shot on location in New York City . It stars Paul Newman as " Fast " Eddie Felson , Jackie Gleason as Minnesota Fats , Piper Laurie as Sarah , and George C. Scott as Bert .
 The Hustler was a major critical and popular success , gaining a reputation as a modern classic . Its exploration of winning , losing , and character garnered a number of major awards ; it is also credited with helping to spark a resurgence in the popularity of pool . Real @-@ life pool player Rudolf Wanderone , known at the time as " New York Fats " and " Chicago Fats " , claimed to be the real life inspiration for Gleason 's character , Minnesota Fats , and adopted the name as his own .

 = = Plot = =

 Small @-@ time pool hustler " Fast Eddie " Felson travels cross @-@ country with his partner Charlie to challenge the legendary player " Minnesota Fats " . Arriving at Fats ' home pool hall , Eddie declares he will win $ 10 @,@ 000 that night . Fats arrives and he and Eddie agree to play straight pool for $ 200 a game . After initially falling behind , Eddie surges back to being $ 1 @,@ 000 ahead and suggests raising the bet to $ 1 @,@ 000 a game ; Fats agrees . He sends out a runner , Preacher , to Johnny 's Bar , ostensibly for whiskey , but really to get professional gambler Bert Gordon to the hall . Eddie gets ahead $ 11 @,@ 000 and Charlie tries to convince him to quit , but Eddie insists the game will end only when Fats says it is over . Fats agrees to continue after Bert labels Eddie a " loser . " After 25 hours and an entire bottle of bourbon , Eddie is ahead over $ 18 @,@ 000 , but loses it all along with all but $ 200 of his original stake . At their hotel later , Eddie leaves half of the remaining stake with a sleeping Charlie and leaves .
 Eddie stashes his belongings at the local bus terminal , where he meets Sarah Packard , an alcoholic who is supported by her father , attends college part @-@ time , and walks with a limp . He meets her again at a bar . They go back to her place but she refuses to let him in , saying he is " too hungry " . Eddie moves into a rooming house and starts hustling for small stakes . He finds Sarah again and this time she takes him in , but with reservations . Charlie finds Eddie at Sarah 's and tries to persuade him to go back out on the road . Eddie refuses and Charlie realizes he plans to challenge Fats again . Eddie realizes that Charlie held out his percentage and becomes enraged , believing that with that money he could have rebounded to beat Fats . Eddie dismisses Charlie as a scared old man and tells him to " go lie down and die " by himself .
 At Johnny 's Bar , Eddie joins a poker game where Bert is playing , and loses $ 20 . Afterward , Bert tells Eddie that he has talent as a pool player but no character . He figures that Eddie will need at least $ 3 @,@ 000 to challenge Fats again . Bert calls him a " born loser " but nevertheless offers to stake him in return for 75 % of his winnings ; Eddie refuses .
 Eddie humiliates a local pool shark , exposing himself as a hustler , and the other players punish him by breaking his thumbs . As he heals , Sarah cares for him and tells him she loves him , but he cannot say the words in return . When Eddie is ready to play , he agrees to Bert 's terms , deciding that a " 25 % slice of something big is better than a 100 % slice of nothing " .
 Bert , Eddie , and Sarah travel to the Kentucky Derby , where Bert arranges a match for Eddie against a wealthy local socialite named Findley . The game turns out to be carom billiards , not pool . When Eddie loses badly , Bert refuses to keep staking him . Sarah pleads with Eddie to leave with her , saying that the world he is living in and its inhabitants are " perverted , twisted , and crippled " ; he refuses . Seeing Eddie 's anger , Bert agrees to let the match continue at $ 1 @,@ 000 a game . Eddie comes back to win $ 12 @,@ 000 . He collects his $ 3 @,@ 000 share and decides to walk back to the hotel . Bert arrives first and subjects Sarah to a humiliating sexual encounter . After , she scrawls " PERVERTED " , " TWISTED " , and " CRIPPLED " in lipstick on the bathroom mirror . Eddie arrives back at the hotel to learn that she has killed herself .
 Eddie returns to challenge Fats again , putting up his entire $ 3 @,@ 000 stake on a single game . He wins game after game , beating Fats so badly that Fats is forced to quit . Bert demands a share of Eddie 's winnings and threatens that Eddie will be injured unless he pays . But Eddie says that if he is not killed he will kill Bert when he recovers ; invoking the memory of Sarah , he shames Bert into giving up his claim . Instead , Bert orders Eddie never to walk into a big @-@ time pool hall again . Eddie and Fats compliment each other as players , and Eddie walks out .

 = = Cast = =

 Cast notes
 Pool champion Willie Mosconi has a cameo appearance as Willie , who holds the stakes for Eddie and Fats 's games . Mosconi 's hands also appear in many of the closeup shots .

 = = Production = =

 The Tevis novel had been optioned several times , including by Frank Sinatra , but attempts to adapt it for the screen were unsuccessful . Director Rossen 's daughter Carol Rossen speculates that previous adaptations focused too much on the pool aspects of the story and not enough on the human interaction . Rossen , who had hustled pool himself as a youth and who had made an abortive attempt to write a pool @-@ themed play called Corner Pocket , optioned the book and teamed with Sidney Carroll to produce the script .
 According to Bobby Darin 's agent , Martin Baum , Paul Newman 's agent turned down the part of Fast Eddie . Newman was originally unavailable to play Fast Eddie regardless , being committed to star opposite Elizabeth Taylor in the film Two for the Seesaw . Rossen offered Darin the part after seeing him on The Mike Wallace Interview . When Taylor was forced to drop out of Seesaw because of shooting overruns on Cleopatra , Newman was freed up to take the role , which he accepted after reading just half of the script . No one associated with the production officially notified Darin or his representatives that he had been replaced ; they found out from a member of the public at a charity horse race .
 Rossen filmed The Hustler over six weeks , entirely in New York City . Much of the action was filmed at two now @-@ defunct pool halls , McGirr 's and Ames Billiard Academy . Other shooting locations included a townhouse on East 82nd Street , which served as the Louisville home of Murray Hamilton 's character Findley , and the Manhattan Greyhound bus terminal . The film crew built a dining area that was so realistic that confused passengers sat there and waited to place their orders . Willie Mosconi served as technical advisor on the film and shot a number of the trick shots in place of the actors . All of Gleason 's shots were his own ; they were filmed in wide @-@ angle to emphasize having the actor and the shot in the same frames . Rossen , in pursuit of the style he termed " neo @-@ neo @-@ realistic " , hired actual street thugs , enrolled them in the Screen Actors Guild and used them as extras . Scenes that were included in the shooting script but did not make it into the final film include a scene at Ames pool hall establishing that Eddie is on his way to town ( originally slated to be the first scene of the film ) and a longer scene of Preacher talking to Bert at Johnny 's Bar which establishes Preacher is a junkie .
 Early shooting put more focus on the pool playing , but during filming Rossen made the decision to place more emphasis on the love story between Newman and Laurie 's characters . Despite the change in emphasis , Rossen still used the various pool games to show the strengthening of Eddie 's character and the evolution of his relationship to Bert and Sarah , through the positioning of the characters in the frame . For example , when Eddie is playing Findley , Eddie is positioned below Bert in a two shot but above Findley while still below Bert in a three shot . When Sarah enters the room , she is below Eddie in two shot while in a three shot Eddie is still below Bert . When Eddie is kneeling over Sarah 's body , Bert again appears above him but Eddie attacks Bert , ending up on top of him . Eddie finally appears above Bert in two shot when Eddie returns to beat Fats .

 = = Themes = =

 The Hustler is fundamentally a story of what it means to be a human being , couched within the context of winning and losing . Describing the film , Robert Rossen said : " My protagonist , Fast Eddie , wants to become a great pool player , but the film is really about the obstacles he encounters in attempting to fulfill himself as a human being . He attains self @-@ awareness only after a terrible personal tragedy which he has caused — and then he wins his pool game . " Roger Ebert concurs with this assessment , citing The Hustler as " one of the few American movies in which the hero wins by surrendering , by accepting reality instead of his dreams . "
 The film was also somewhat autobiographical for Rossen , relating to his dealings with the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee . A screenwriter during the 1930s and ' 40s , he had been involved with the Communist Party in the 1930s and refused to name names at his first HUAC appearance . Ultimately he changed his mind and identified friends and colleagues as party members . Similarly , Felson sells his soul and betrays the one person who really knows and loves him in a Faustian pact to gain character .
 Film and theatre historian Ethan Mordden has identified The Hustler as one of a handful of films from the early 1960s that re @-@ defined the relationship of films to their audiences . This new relationship , he writes , is " one of challenge rather than flattery , of doubt rather than certainty . " No film of the 1950s , Mordden asserts , " took such a brutal , clear look at the ego @-@ affirmation of the one @-@ on @-@ one contest , at the inhumanity of the winner or the castrated vulnerability of the loser . " Although some have suggested the resemblance of this film to classic film noir , Mordden rejects the comparison based on Rossen 's ultra @-@ realistic style , also noting that the film lacks noir 's " Treacherous Woman or its relish in discovering crime among the bourgeoisie , hungry bank clerks and lusty wives . " Mordden does note that while Fast Eddie " has a slight fifties ring " , the character " makes a decisive break with the extraordinarily feeling tough guys of the ' rebel ' era ... [ b ] ut he does end up seeking out his emotions " and telling Bert that he is a loser because he 's dead inside .

 = = Reception = =

 The Hustler had its world premiere in Washington , D.C. on September 25 , 1961 . Prior to the premiere , Richard Burton hosted a midnight screening of the film for the casts of the season 's Broadway shows , which generated a great deal of positive word of mouth . Initially reluctant to publicize the film , 20th Century Fox responded by stepping up its promotional activities .
 The film was well received by critics , although with the occasional caveat . Variety praised the performances of the entire main cast but felt that the " sordid aspects " of the story prevented the film from achieving the " goal of being pure entertainment . " Variety also felt the film was far too long . Stanley Kauffmann , writing for The New Republic , concurred in part with this assessment . Kauffmann strongly praised the principal cast , calling Newman " first @-@ rate " and writing that Scott 's was " his most credible performance to date . " Laurie , he writes , gives her part " movingly anguished touches " ( although he also mildly criticizes her for over @-@ reliance on Method acting ) . While he found that the script " strains hard to give an air of menace and criminality to the pool hall " and also declares it " full of pseudo @-@ meaning " , Kauffmann lauds Rossen 's " sure , economical " direction , especially in regard to Gleason who , he says , does not so much act as " [ pose ] for a number of pictures which are well arranged by Rossen . It is the best use of a manikin by a director since Kazan photographed Burl Ives as Big Daddy . " The New York Times , despite finding that the film " strays a bit " and that the romance between Newman and Laurie 's characters " seems a mite far @-@ fetched " , nonetheless found that The Hustler " speaks powerfully in a universal language that spellbinds and reveals bitter truths . "
 The Hustler received nine Academy Award nominations . The film won two , for Best Art Direction @-@ Set Decoration , Black @-@ and @-@ White ( Harry Horner and Gene Callahan ) and Best Cinematography , Black @-@ and @-@ White ( Eugen Schüfftan ) . The film was also nominated for Best Picture and Newman was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role . Gleason and Scott were both nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role ; Scott refused the nomination . Laurie was nominated for Best Actress in a Leading Role . Rossen received nominations for Best Director and , with Carroll , for Best Writing , Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium .
 Newman was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor . Gleason and Scott were each nominated for Best Supporting Actor and Scott was also nominated as Best New Star of the Year . At the 1962 BAFTA Awards , The Hustler tied with the Soviet film Ballad of a Soldier for Best Film from Any Source . Newman won for Best Foreign Actor and Piper Laurie was nominated for Best Foreign Actress . Gleason was honored as Best Supporting Actor by the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures and the film was named among the Board 's ten best films of 1961 . Rossen was named Best Director by the New York Film Critics Circle Awards and Rossen and Carroll shared the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written Drama .
 American Film Institute Lists
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies - Nominated
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills - Nominated
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains :
 Bert Gordon - Nominated Villain
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes :
 " Eddie , you 're a born loser . " - Nominated
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) - Nominated
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 - # 6 Sports Film

 = = Legacy = =

 In the decades since its release , The Hustler has cemented its reputation as a classic . Roger Ebert , echoing earlier praise for the performances , direction , and cinematography and adding laurels for editor Dede Allen , cites the film as " one of those films where scenes have such psychic weight that they grow in our memories . " He further cites Fast Eddie Felson as one of " only a handful of movie characters so real that the audience refers to them as touchstones . " TV Guide calls the film a " dark stunner " offering " a grim world whose only bright spot is the top of the pool table , yet [ with ] characters [ who ] maintain a shabby nobility and grace . " The four leads are again lavishly praised for their performances and the film is summed up as " not to be missed . "
 Paul Newman reprised his role as Fast Eddie Felson in the 1986 film The Color of Money , for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role . A number of observers and critics have suggested that this Oscar was in belated recognition for his performance in The Hustler . In 1997 , the Library of Congress selected The Hustler for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . " Carroll and Rossen 's screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America in 2006 as the 96th best motion picture screenplay of all time . In June 2008 , AFI released its " Ten top Ten " — the best ten films in ten " classic " American film genres — after polling over 1 @,@ 500 people from the creative community . The Hustler was acknowledged as the sixth best film in the sports genre .
 The Hustler is credited with sparking a resurgence in the popularity of pool in the United States , which had been on the decline for decades . The film also brought recognition to Willie Mosconi , who , despite having won multiple world championships , was virtually unknown to the general public . Perhaps the greatest beneficiary of the film 's popularity was a real @-@ life pool hustler named Rudolf Wanderone . Mosconi claimed in an interview at the time of the film 's release that the character of Minnesota Fats was based on Wanderone , who at the time was known as " New York Fatty " . Wanderone immediately adopted the Minnesota Fats nickname and parlayed his association with the film into book and television deals and other ventures . Author Walter Tevis denied for the rest of his life that Wanderone had played any role in the creation of the character . Other players would claim , with greater or lesser degrees of credibility , to have served as models for Fast Eddie , including Ronnie Allen , Ed Taylor , Ed Parker , and Eddie Pelkey .

